The Status of Glaciers in the
Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region
The Status of Glaciers in the
Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




Editors
Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya
Basanta Shrestha




International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, Kathmandu, Nepal, November 2011
Published by
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development
GPO Box 3226, Kathmandu, Nepal


Copyright © 2011
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD)
All rights reserved. Published 2011


ISBN   978 92 9115 215 5 (printed)
       978 92 9115 217 9 (electronic)
LCCN 2011-312013


Printed and bound in Nepal by
Sewa Printing Press, Kathmandu, Nepal


Production team
A Beatrice Murray (Consultant editor)
Andrea Perlis (Senior editor)
Dharma R Maharjan (Layout and design)
Asha Kaji Thaku (Editorial assistant)


Note
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part and in any form for educational or non-profit purposes without special permission
from the copyright holder, provided acknowledgement of the source is made. ICIMOD would appreciate receiving a copy of any
publication that uses this publication as a source. No use of this publication may be made for resale or for any other commercial purpose
whatsoever without prior permission in writing from ICIMOD.

The views and interpretations in this publication are those of the author(s). They are not attribuTable to ICIMOD and do not imply the
expression of any opinion concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation
of its frontiers or boundaries, or the endorsement of any product.

This publication is available in electronic form at www.icimod.org/publications


Citation: Bajracharya, SR; Shrestha, B (eds) (2011) The status of glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region. Kathmandu: ICIMOD
Foreword


I am very pleased to present this report on the state of the glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region. The study
represents a major advance on ICIMOD’s first publication on the state of glaciers in 2001. Close collaboration with
specialists from the different countries has enabled the preparation of a comprehensive account of the glacier cover of
the entire region using a consistent approach and methodology based on remote sensing information from a limited time
period.

The Hindu Kush-Himalayan region encompasses more than 4 million square kilometres of hills and mountains in the eight
countries of Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Myanmar, Nepal, and Pakistan. The vast expanse of snow
and ice gives it the name ‘water tower of Asia’. The meltwater from snow and ice feeds ten large river systems: the Amu
Darya, Brahmaputra, Ganges, Indus, Irrawaddy, Mekong, Salween, Tarim, Yangtze, and Yellow Rivers. The river basins
cover an area of about 9 million square kilometres of which 2.8 million square kilometres lie within the Hindu Kush-
Himalayan region. The inventory identifies 54,000 glaciers, clean-ice and debris-covered, with a total area of
60,000 km2 and estimated 6,000 km3 of ice reserves, within the ten river basins and large interior basin of HKH region.

The cryosphere of the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region plays a significant role in the regional climatic system, and is also
a sensitive indicator of global climate change. Climate change is a major driver affecting the cryospheric environment,
threatening the freshwater reserves and posing increased risks from climate-induced hazards to the mountain region and
its immediate downstream communities. However, there is a marked lack of consistent, detailed, and long-term information
for the region, and in particular for glacier and snow cover. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
fourth assessment report shows that the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region comprises a major data gap in terms of any climatic
assessment.

We believe that this study represents a significant step towards bridging the data and information gap on the glaciers
of the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region. It is the first report to cover the entire region from a single consistent source. The
complete database and analyses will be made available online in a mountain portal at http://geoportal.icimod.org/
HKHGlacier, which can be used by all stakeholders, from national and local governments to the public at large. The
database provides basic information and knowledge for regional level assessments and monitoring of the glaciated
environment to support the development of strategies and policies in the context of climate change. It will also contribute to
increased understanding of the impacts of climate change on glaciers and the implications for the mountain ecosystem and
the downstream riparian countries in terms of water availability.

We believe that this glacier data has immense importance and will serve the scientific community, decision makers, and
other relevant stakeholders. However, we are also aware of the limitations. This inventory is only a first step in obtaining
the information needed. Field verification of the data could only be carried out at a few selected sites, and mass balancing
remains a task ahead. The estimates on ice volumes are thus imprecise and serve as an indicator only. They will be
corrected as more reliable information becomes available from in situ investigations. As a regional knowledge centre,
ICIMOD hopes to develop the information base further by fostering regional cooperation and promoting sharing and
exchange of data at the international level, thus contributing to reducing the scientific uncertainty in understanding of the
impacts of climate change.

ICIMOD is grateful to the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency (Sida) for its financial support for the
cryosphere monitoring project and advice given during implementation. We are especially pleased that the project has
enabled us to further strengthen our collaboration and cooperation with national partners in our regional member countries.
I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to the ICIMOD colleagues and national partners for their efforts in
undertaking this comprehensive and painstaking study. I am confident that the publication and data portal will be a useful
resource for the countries of the region, as well as for scientists worldwide studying the processes, potential impacts, and
implications of climate change.

                                                                                              Andreas Schild
                                                                                              Director General
                                                                                              ICIMOD
About This Report


This report provides a comprehensive account of the glacier coverage of the entire Hindu Kush-Himalayan region
based on a standardised analysis of satellite images over a limited time frame. A mountain web portal
(http://geoportal.icimod.org/HKHGlacier) has been set up to complement the report and provide easy access to
the data and analyses. The report and the database serve as a significant step in filling the gap in information on
the glaciers of the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region. The data analyses are presented in terms of the major river basins:
Amu Darya, Brahmaputra, Ganges, Indus, Irrawaddy, Mekong, Salween, Tarim, Yangtze, and Yellow, and the large
Himalayan interior basin. These basins extend across the seven Hindu Kush-Himalayan countries of Afghanistan,
Bhutan, China, India, Myanmar, Nepal, and Pakistan. The eighth Hindu Kush-Himalayan country, Bangladesh, has
no glacial cover. A consistent remote sensing methodology was used to delineate the clean-ice and debris cover of
glaciers and the glacier attribute parameters which are documented in line with the standards provided by the World
Glacier Monitoring Services. The report provides a comprehensive account of glaciers to cover the entire region
utilising a uniform methodological approach.
Contents


Foreword                                                   iii
About This Report                                           iv
Contributing Authors                                        vi
Acknowledgements                                           vii
Acronyms and Abbreviations                                viii

Part 1 – Methodology                                       1

     1 Introduction                                        2

     2 The Glacier Inventory Approach                      5

     3 Data Collection and Glacier Mapping Methodology     7

     4 Glacier Inventory Attributes                       14

Part 2 – Status of Glaciers                               17

     5 Amu Darya Basin                                    18

     6 Indus Basin                                        24

     7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin                               41

     8 Brahmaputra Basin                                  68

     9 Irrawaddy Basin                                    96

     10 Salween Basin                                    100

     11 Mekong Basin                                     104

     12 Yangtze Basin                                    108

     13 Yellow River Basin                               111

     14 Tarim Interior Basin                             115

     15 Eastern Asian Qinghai-Tibetan Interior Basins    119

Conclusion                                               122

References                                               125
Contributing Authors


The original data for this report was prepared at ICIMOD in collaboration with national partners and later
synthesised and analysed to provide a basin-wise picture. The contributions of the individual authors to the chapters
are listed below.



Part 1 Methodology                                                      9 Irrawaddy Basin
                                                                        Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;
1 Introduction                                                          Finu Shrestha1
Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;
Finu Shrestha1; Basanta Shrestha1                                       10 Salween Basin
                                                                        Guo Wanqin3; Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Liu Shiyin3;
2 The Glacier Inventory Approach                                        Sudan Bikash Maharjan1; Finu Shrestha1; Yao Xiaojun3;
Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;                     Wei Junfeng3
Finu Shrestha1
                                                                        11 Mekong Basin
3 Data Collection and Glacier Mapping                                   Wei Junfeng3; Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Liu Shiyin3;
Methodology                                                             Sudan Bikash Maharjan1; Finu Shrestha1; Guo Wanqin3;
Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;                     Yao Xiaojun3
Finu Shrestha1; Basanta Shrestha1
                                                                        12 Yangtze Basin
4 Glacier Inventory Attributes                                          Wei Junfeng3; Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Liu Shiyin3;
Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;                     Sudan Bikash Maharjan1; Finu Shrestha1; Yao Xiaojun3;
Finu Shrestha1                                                          Guo Wanqin3

                                                                        13 Yellow River Basin
Part 2 Status of Glaciers                                               Guo Wanqin3; Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Liu Shiyin3,
                                                                        Sudan Bikash Maharjan1; Finu Shrestha1; Wei Junfeng3;
5 Amu Darya Basin                                                       Yao Xiaojun3
Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;
Finu Shrestha1                                                          14 Tarim Interior Basin
                                                                        Liu Shiyin3; Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Guo Wanqin3;
6 Indus Basin                                                           Yao Xiaojun3; Wei Junfeng3; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;
Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;                     Finu Shrestha1
Finu Shrestha1; Ghazanfar Ali Khattak2
                                                                        15 Eastern Asian Qinghai-Tibetan Interior Basins
7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin                                                  Yao Xiaojun3; Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Liu Shiyin3,
Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;                     Sudan Bikash Maharjan1; Finu Shrestha1; Guo Wanqin3;
Finu Shrestha1                                                          Wei Junfeng3


8 Brahmaputra Basin
Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Liu Shiyin3; Guo Wanqin3;                   Conclusion
Sudan Bikash Maharjan1; Finu Shrestha1; Yao Xiaojun3;                   Samjwal Ratna Bajracharya1; Sudan Bikash Maharjan1;
Wei Junfeng3                                                            Finu Shrestha1; Basanta Shrestha1; Liu Shiyin3




_____________
1
  International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development (ICIMOD), Kathmandu, Nepal
2
  National Centre for Excellence in Geology (NCEG), Peshawar University, Peshawar, Pakistan
3
  State Key Laboratory of Cryospheric Sciences (SKLCS), Cold and Arid Regions Environmental and Engineering Research Institute, Chinese
Academy of Sciences (CAREERI, CAS), Lanzhou 730000, China
Acknowledgements


The editors and authors want to express their sincere thanks to Professor Jeffrey S Kargel, University of Arizona,
Department of Hydrology and Water Resources, USA; Dr Walter W Immerzeel, Utrecht University, Faculty of
Geosciences, The Netherlands, and Dr Anil Kulkarni, Divecha Centre for Climate Change, Centre for Atmospheric
and Oceanic Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, India, for their detailed review of the manuscript. Our special
thanks go also to Dr Tobias Bolch of the Geographisches Institut, Universität Zurich, Switzerland, and Professor
Dr Vishnu Dangol of the Department of Geology, Tri-Chandra Campus, Tribhuvan University, Nepal, for their
comments and suggestions for improving the manuscript.

Many people have contributed to the preparation of this report and we would like to thank them all. In particular
we would like to thank Mr Sangay (Tiger) and Mr Sherub (Bird) from Ugyen Wangchuk Institute for Conservation
and Environment (UWICE), Bhutan, for their assistance during the initial stages of glacier mapping of the Bhutan
Himalayas; Mr Kabir Uddin, Mr Deo Raj Gurung, and Mr Hammad Gilani from ICIMOD for their assistance and
support in the development of the semi-automatic methodology for mapping of glaciers; and Mr Pradeep Dangol
from ICIMOD for his untiring support in the preparation of graphics and developing a standard format for the Figures
and Tables.

The inventory was prepared under the project ‘Too Much, Too Little Water – Adaptation Strategies to Climate-
Induced Water Stress and Hazards in the Greater Himalayan Region’, funded by the Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency (Sida). This financial support from Sweden is gratefully acknowledged. We wish
to express our sincere gratitude to Mr Pradeep Mool, coordinator of the Cryosphere Group; Dr Mats Eriksson, former
coordinator of the ’Too Much, Too Little Water’ project, and Professor Hua Ouyang, Programme Manager, for their
indispensable support for this undertaking.

We particularly wish to express our great appreciation and thanks to our colleague Mr Rajan Man Bajracharya for
his support in structuring the glacier database for the geoportal, and to extend our thanks to Mr Birendra Bajracharya
from ICIMOD and Mr Wu Lizong from CAREERI, CAS, for their support, strength, help, and co-operation in the
completion of this assignment.

Last but not least we thank the staff and consultants of the Publications Unit for their dedicated support in preparing
the manuscript for publication
Acronyms and Abbreviations


ASTER     Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and Reflection Radiometer
CI        clean-ice
DC        debris-covered
DEM       digital elevation model
ETM       Enhanced Thematic Mapper
GIS       geographic information system
GLIMS     Global Land Ice Measurements from Space
HKH       Hindu Kush-Himalayas
ID        Identity
Landsat   Land Resources Satellite
LWM       land and water mask
masl      metres above sea level
NDSI      Normalized Difference Snow Index
NDVI      Normalized Difference Vegetative Index
SLC       Scan Line Corrector
SKLCS     State Key Laboratory of Cryospheric Sciences
SPOT      Système Probatoire d’Observation de la Terre / Satellite Pour l’Observation de la Terre
SRTM      Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
TM        Thematic Mapper (Landsat)
TTS       Temporary Technical Secretariat
UNESCO    United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UTM       Universal Transverse Mercator
WGI       World Glacier Inventory
WGMS      World Glacier Monitoring Service
WGS       World Geodetic System
Part 1

Methodology
                The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




    1 Introduction


    The Hindu Kush-Himalayan (HKH) region extends from 15.95º to 39.31º N latitude and 60.85º to 105.04º E
    longitude, encompassing an area of mountains more than 4,192,000 km2 in the eight countries of Afghanistan,
    Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Myanmar, Nepal, and Pakistan. The region is one of the most dynamic,
    fragile, and complex mountain systems in the world as a result of tectonic activity and the rich diversity of climates,
    hydrology, and ecology. The high Himalayan region is the freshwater tower of South Asia; it has the highest
    concentration of snow and glaciers outside the polar regions giving it the name Third Pole (Dyhrenfurth 1955).
    Meltwater from the snow and glaciers feeds the ten largest river systems in Asia, which together support some
    1.3 billion people in their downstream basin areas. These mountain ranges not only present a beautiful landscape,
    they play an important role in global atmospheric circulation, the hydrological cycle, and water resources
    availability, and provide a wide range of ecosystem services.

    Mountain areas are particularly vulnerable to climate change, and the HKH region is no exception. A number of
    noticeable impacts related to climate change have already been documented. For example, the temperature has
    increased in the Nepalese Himalayas by between 0.15 and 0.6°C per decade (Shrestha et al. 1999), which is
    two to eight times higher than the global mean warming of 0.74°C over the last 100 years (IPCC 2001a, 2001b).
    The glaciers in much of the region show signs of shrinking, thinning, and retreating. Among others, this is leading to
    the formation and expansion of glacial lakes, which could lead to an increase in the number of glacial lake outburst
    floods (GLOFs) (Ives 1986; Kattelmann 2003; Mool et al. 2001a, 2001b; Richardson and Reynolds 2000;
    Quincey et al. 2007; Yamada 1998; Zimmermann et al. 1986; Bolch et al. 2008). A number of GLOFs have
    already been reported in this region (Bajracharya et al. 2007; Mool 1995; Mool et al. 2001a, 2001b; Reynolds
    1998; Yamada 2000, 1998; Yamada and Sharma 1993).If the present trends persist, the store of glacier ice will
    gradually be reduced, which will impact on the availability of water resources (Barnett et al. 2005; IPCC 2007).

    Climate and glacier changes cannot be generalised across the region, however; and the consequences of any
    change for glaciological hazards and water resources are complex and thus difficult to predict. The general trend
    appears to be one of glacial retreat, as in many mountain areas in the world, but observations of individual glaciers
    indicate that the annual retreat rates vary from basin to basin. In some cases the rate has doubled in recent years
    compared to the early seventies (Bajracharya et al. 2007). At the same time, increasing ice mass balances and
    growing glaciers have been reported in the Karakoram mountains in the western part of the region (Hewitt 2005,
    2010; Scherler et al. 2011) illustrating the complexity of the situation. It is likely that there are large variations in
    glacier response to a complex pattern of climatic changes within the Himalayas.

    Notwithstanding the importance of the HKH region, there is a lack of data on the snow and glacial resources of
    these mountains, and especially of the long-term information on glaciers required for a credible scientific assessment.
    Glacier inventories have been compiled for some parts of the region using different approaches, but there has been
    no comprehensive coordinated assessment. A long-term consistent glacier database is needed to support assessments
    of glacier status across the region and understanding of climate change impacts on glaciers, as well as for climate
    and hydrological monitoring.

    ICIMOD has been working with partner institutes in the region to build a regional database of HKH glaciers since
    the late 1990s. This publication presents the results of a recent study designed to provide a comprehensive account
    of the number and status of glaciers across the whole region.




2
                                                              1 Introduction



Existing Regional Inventories

There are an estimated 160,000 glaciers worldwide (Paul et al. 2009) covering nearly 15 million square kilometres
(including the polar ice sheets), or about 10% of the land area, and containing 2.15% of all freshwater. About 3% of
the glacier cover is found in the mountains of Asia, Europe, and America. The Hindu Kush-Himalayan region (HKH)
has the largest concentration of snow and glaciers outside the polar regions (Kulkarni 1991, 1994).

The Geological Survey of India (GSI) and Cold and Arid Region Environmental and Engineering Research Institute
(CAREERI) of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) have both carried out glacier studies in the HKH region.

The Geological Survey of India has carried out hydrological studies and glacier mass balancing (on a limited scale)
of Indian Himalayan glaciers since 1978. It inventoried 5,243 glaciers with a total area of 37,959 km2 distributed
among the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Sikkim, and Uttarakhand (GSI
1999, Raina and Srivastava 2008). The Indian glacier data were based on Survey of India topographic maps,
aerial photographs, and satellite images, with limited field verification. The inventory showed that Jammu and
Kashmir has the highest concentration of glaciers in India, and Arunachal Pradesh the lowest.

The first detailed Chinese glacier inventory was published in 2000 in the form of 22 separate documents, based
on the World Glacier Inventory guidelines. It described 46,298 glaciers with a total area of 59,406 km2, 48% of
the total area of glaciers in Asia (Chao-hai et al. 2000). The Cold and Arid Regions Environmental and Engineering
Research Institute (CAREERI) is in the process of carrying out a second national inventory.

Between 1999 and 2004, ICIMOD and its partner institutes prepared an inventory of glaciers in selected parts
of the HKH region (Figure 1.1). The inventory was based on the 1:50,000 scale topographic maps published by
the Survey of India in the 1970s or Landsat satellite images from 2000 for areas for which no topographic maps




             Figure 1.1: The Hindu Kush-Himalayan region showing the areas covered by ICIMOD’s
                          inventory of glaciers and glacial lakes study from 1999-2004




                                                                                                                       3
                The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



    were available. This study identified more than 15,000 glaciers with a total area of some 33,000 km2 in Bhutan
    (1,317 km2), Nepal (5,324 km2 in the high Himalayas), Pakistan (15,041 km2 in the Hindu Kush, Himalaya, and
    Karakoram mountains), and selected river basins of India and China. (Bajracharya and Mool 2007; Ives et al.
    2010).

    Armstrong (2011) recently prepared a report for USAID, later published by ICIMOD, summarising the literature on
    glaciers, and especially glacier melt and retreat, in the Himalayan, Hindu Kush, Karakoram, Pamir, and Tien Shan
    mountain ranges (Armstrong 2011).

    The Present Study

    The study presented here was designed to develop comprehensive baseline information on the glaciers of the entire
    HKH region organised by major basins and sub-basins. The glacier inventory was prepared from satellite images
    taken within a short period to maintain uniformity of the observational database, and for areas in all countries except
    China was prepared at ICIMOD. The inventory data for basin areas in China were received through collaboration
    with CAREERI.

    In addition to the immediate research objectives, the long-term objective is to support global climate change
    research by facilitating access to well-documented glacier data. The project also aimed to build the regional
    capacity of partner institutes engaged in glacier mapping and to undertake the glacier inventory using tools and
    methods developed at the local and national level. The glacier database will be provided online to facilitate access
    to information by policy and decision makers, scientists, and the public at large in the region and beyond. The
    database provides a basis for assessing the rates of change of glaciers, which is important for understanding climate
    change, water resource planning, and mitigation of glacial lake outburst flood (GLOF) hazards.

    The methodology used and basin-wise results are presented in the following chapters. The detailed data are
    available in the online database.




4
                                                                   2 The Glacier Inventory Approach




2 The Glacier Inventory Approach


Global Level Glacier Inventory Initiatives
There are three major global initiatives related to glacier inventory, all interlinked but with different emphases and
approaches.

World Glacier Monitoring Service (WGMS)

A worldwide collection of information about ongoing glacier changes was initiated in 1894 with the foundation
of the International Glacier Commission at the 6th International Geological Congress in Zurich, Switzerland. The
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) introduced a classification scheme for
perennial snow and glacier masses in 1970 as a contribution to the International Hydrological Decade. The aim
was to provide a useful database of glacial observations in a standardised digital form. The system was designed
to characterise the morphology of glaciers rapidly and precisely. The major advantage of this system was that it
allowed the assignment of several parameters of the glaciers. A series of six key parameters that describe various
glacial characteristics facilitated the subsequent compilation. By applying a matrix-type classification based on
specific glaciological characteristics, it was possible to provide a defined number of values for each parameter. This
system offers a multitude of possibilities for description of individual glaciers.

In 1986 the World Glacier Monitoring Service (WGMS) started to maintain and continue the collection of
information on ongoing glacier changes following the combining of the former International Commission on Snow
and Ice (ICSI) services of PSFG (Permanent Service on Fluctuations of Glaciers) and TTS/WGI (Temporal Technical
Secretariat/World Glacier Inventory). WGMS adopted the UNESCO classification scheme in a revised form and
has proven its general applicability to over 67,000 glaciers worldwide. Today, WGMS (www.geo.uzh.ch/wgms)
collects standardised observations on changes with time in mass, volume, area, and length of glaciers (glacier
fluctuations) as well as statistical information on the distribution of perennial surface ice in space (glacier inventories).
Along with further relevant glacier data, the information is compiled in the World Glacier Inventory which is located
at the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC, http://nsidc.org).

Global Land Ice Measurements from Space (GLIMS)

Field-based mapping of glaciers can be hard and time consuming as glaciers are generally located in remote high
areas with rugged topography. Satellite remote sensing has therefore become a key application for glacier mapping.
The Global Land Ice Measurements from Space initiative (GLIMS, www.glims.org) was initiated to capitalise on new
developments in the field of remote sensing technologies and monitor the world’s glaciers primarily using data from
optical satellite sensors, such as the Advanced Spaceborne Thermal Emission and reflection Radiometer (ASTER) and
Landsat 7 ETM+ (Kargel et al. 2005, 2010). GLIMS has a formalised partnership with WGMS and GLIMS data
are also archived at the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC, http://nsidc.org).

Because of the enormous variety of glacier types and sizes, it is often not easy to map them unambiguously. Likewise,
it is difficult to map all glaciers using a single methodology, and for practical reasons, such as availability of cloud
free imagery, various alternatives or supplementary datasets are used. GLIMS researchers have developed a set
of technological approaches to support the mapping of glaciers, glacier flow velocities, debris loads, glacier lake
development, and elevation changes (Wessels et al. 2002; Bishop et al. 2004; Kargel et al. 2005; Rivera et al.
2005; Raup et al. 2007a, 2007b; Kääb et al. 2003; Paul et al. 2009). GLIMS has also been active in higher-
order glacier assessments, such as assessment of glacier-related hazards (Kääb et al. 2003; Huggel et al. 2005;

                                                                                                                                5
                The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



    Kargel et al. 2010). GLIMS has developed guidelines for mapping and documenting glacier data to ensure
    consistency and homogeneity in the morphological classification, taking account of the many datasets and
    methodologies available. The illustrated GLIMS Glacier Classification Manual provides practical guidance for analysts
    (Rau et al. 2005). GLIMS relies most strongly on satellite-based mapping, but most remote sensing glaciology experts
    also include field-based evidence to validate or supplement the glacier analysis products produced from satellite data.

    Over 60 institutions across the globe are involved in GLIMS; ICIMOD serves as the regional coordinator for Bhutan,
    India, and Nepal.

    GlobGlacier

    GlobGlacier (http://globglacier.ch) is supported by the European Space Agency (ESA) to complement and
    strengthen the existing network for global glacier monitoring. The project helps to establish a global picture of
    glaciers and ice caps, and their role as essential climate variables (ECVs). The major focus of the GlobGlacier
    initiative is to complete the 1970s World Glacier Inventory (WGI) by producing glacier outlines in regions where
    data are lacking or non-existent. Moreover, GlobGlacier will integrate satellite data from various sensors to create
    value added products for a wide range of user communities. Close cooperation of GlobGlacier with major user
    groups such as WGMS, and related projects such as GLIMS, is designed to ensure that maximum benefit is
    obtained from the generated products from a global perspective (Paul et al. 2009).

    GlobGlacier is developing a set of ‘Guidelines for the compilation of glacier inventory data from digital sources’,
    currently under review. The structure of the document closely follows the original guidelines by Müller et al. (1977)
    for the former WGI developed by the Temporary Technical Secretariat (TTS) at the Swiss Federal Institute of
    Technology, Zurich. The main idea is to provide a selection of essential topographic glacier parameters and other
    attributes that can be calculated from glacier outlines and digital elevation models (DEM) using mostly automated
    methods. These should be provided whenever possible with any submission to the GLIMS database. A further set of
    parameters is listed as useful but not mandatory.

    Regional Level Glacier Inventory Initiatives
    A number of institutes and scientists in the HKH region have carried out studies of glaciers using different observational
    databases and methodologies. However, there is still a need to develop a common approach for the entire region
    and to support coordination among the countries for regular long-term mapping and monitoring of the glaciated
    environment. ICIMOD has been working with national partners on mapping of different aspects of the cryosphere to
    support regional water resources assessment, hazard management applications, and global climate change research.

    The methodology used by ICIMOD in the past for mapping and inventory of the glaciers was based on the
    guidelines for the WGI (Müller et al. 1977). These were based on visual interpretation and manual digitisation of
    glacier boundaries followed by integration of a non-spatial database. The ICIMOD inventory was systematically
    carried out for selected drainage basins using topographic maps published from 1963 to 1982, or satellite images
    from 1999 and 2000 in areas without topographic map coverage. The inventory provided a first overview of the
    glaciers in the region, but the data were based on a wide temporal range and derived from different sources. The
    present study was designed to address this problem and deliver a first comprehensive and consistent inventory of
    the region’s glaciers. The study employs a glacier mapping methodology that is able to rapidly deliver glacier data
    consistent with established international inventory standards.

    Automatic delineation of glaciers is only valid for clean-ice glaciers (Paul 2002; Racoviteanu 2009; Bolch et al.
    2008). However, in most parts of the HKH, debris-covered glaciers, or debris-covered tongues, predominate. While
    automatic methods have been developed to map debris-covered glaciers, they always produce errors, which in the
    best cases require manual correction. Mapping without intensive human involvement is not yet technically feasible.
    Manual mapping of glaciers using satellite imagery, complemented by limited ground-based measurements for
    verification, is a reasonable approach but extremely labour intensive. Thus the current inventory used a combination
    of manual and automatic methods. The updated inventory used a single source of satellite imagery from a limited
    period of time to facilitate more precise spatial and temporal assessment of glacier status and change.

6
                                                                3 Data Collection and Glacier Mapping Methodology




3 Data Collection and
  Glacier Mapping Methodology


Field-based glacier mapping is a challenging task in the high Hindu Kush-Himalayan region because of the rugged
terrain, high altitude, harsh climatic conditions, lack of logistical support, and remoteness. In recent years, the
increased availability of satellite data in combination with advanced remote sensing tools and techniques have
significantly facilitated mapping and monitoring of glaciers. The updated ICIMOD inventory used a combination of
automated and manual interpretation of satellite images, complemented by limited field studies. The data collection
and mapping methodology is described in the following sections, and the allocation of attributes for the inventory in
the following chapter.

Data Collection and Preparation

Satellite images

Satellite data were first used to map glaciers in the early 1970s, making use of the US Earth Resources Technology
Satellite ERTS, later renamed Landsat-1. Since then, several studies on glacier mapping have used data from a
steadily improving series of satellites launched by the world’s space agencies, including the Landsat Multispectral
Scanner (MSS), one of the first satellites used for glacier mapping by the United States Geological Survey (USGS),
ASTER used by GLIMS, and SPOT and ASTER used by GlobGlacier.

The present inventory used Landsat 5-MSS and Landsat 7-ETM+ images from 2005 ± 3 years, which are freely
downloadable. The best images in this period were selected, i.e., those with least snow cover and no clouds. Figure
3.1 shows the image index map for the HKH region.

The Landsat 7 ETM+ images from June 2003 onwards have a scan line dropout. The Landsat 7 ETM+ scan line
corrector (SLC) failure causes the scanning pattern to exhibit wedge-shaped scan-to-scan gaps. These SLC failed
images are referred to as SLC-off images. The scan gaps vary from one pixel or less near the centre of the images to
fourteen pixels along the east and west edges. Approximately 22% of the normal scene areas in SLC-off images are
missing; however the remaining spectral information maintains the same radiometric and geometric quality as images
prior to the failure (Storey et al. 2005).

Various techniques are available for correcting and filling the gaps in the SLC-off images. The present study used the
IDL extension in ENVI (Environment for Visualizing Images) software to fill the SLC gap. The correction is based on
combining overlapping areas between preceding and subsequent imagery in those areas that show a gap. This is
generally considered to be the best method.

Digital Elevation Model (DEM)

Topographic information such as elevation and slope play a crucial role in identification of glaciers. This information
is derived from a digital elevation model (DEM). A DEM was also used to derive crucial glacier parameters such as
hypsometry, minimum/median elevation, and equilibrium line altitude (ELA). The study used the SRTM (Shuttle Radar
Topography Mission) DEM at a spatial resolution of 90 metres (Figure 3.2).




                                                                                                                          7
    The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



             Figure 3.1: Landsat ETM+ index map for the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region




                   Figure 3.2: SRTM index map for the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region




8
                                                                3 Data Collection and Glacier Mapping Methodology



Glacier Delineation

A semi-automatic methodology was adopted for delineation of glaciers using an object-based image analysis
approach. After the SLC-off correction, the image was segmented in Definiens Developer software using multi-
resolution segmentation. This is a heuristic optimisation procedure to locally minimise the average heterogeneity of
image objects at a given resolution. Different algorithms were used to differentiate clean-ice (CI) and debris-covered
(DC) glaciers based on their spectral characteristics. The overall multi-stage process of classification is summarised in
Figure 3.3.

Delineation of clean-ice glaciers

The identification of CI glaciers relied primarily on the normalised difference snow and ice index (NDSI) with NDSI
= ([Mean Band 2]-[Mean Band 5])/([Mean Band 2]+[Mean Band 5]). An appropriate threshold value for NDSI
based on the histogram and visual judgment was applied to capture the CI segments. The NDSI threshold values
differ slightly from image to image, thus some small polygons of shadow, water bodies, vegetation, bare rock,
debris, and other misclassified polygons are also captured. Further refinements were performed using different filters
including the normalised difference vegetation index (NDVI) for vegetation, a land and water mask (LWM) for water
bodies, and mean hue for shadow. Slope (>60°) and elevation criteria were applied to further refine the data
(Figure 3.4). Polygons smaller than a minimum mapping unit of 0.02 km2 were removed. This process satisfactorily
delineates the outline of CI-type glaciers with minimal manual intervention. The glacier outlines were validated using
available high resolution images in the Google Earth.

Delineation of debris-covered glaciers

Capturing of DC glaciers is further complicated by illuminating errors due to effects from the surroundings. Following
delineation of CI glaciers using NDSI, the DC glaciers were captured from the remaining areas of the image
using either NDVI or mean slope, selected by subjective judgment for each satellite image used (Figure 3.5). This
classification scheme also captures other features such as vegetation, bedrock, and shadows. These were then
removed using filters such as LWM, slope (>25°), and elevation (above 6,000 and below 3,000 masl depending
upon the locality). Areas less than 0.02 km2 were also removed. The delineated glaciers were then checked and
refined in high resolution images from Google Earth.

Generalising and smoothing

The delineation of CI and DC glacier polygons using the automated method generates straight edges and angular
corners consistent with the pixel resolution of the satellite image. These then need to be smoothed. The glacier
polygons were exported into shp file format for further processing and the glacier outlines refined using the G-S-G
(generalise – smooth – regeneralise) method for smooth corners (Figure 3.6).



            Figure 3.3: Flow diagram of the methodology for mapping clean-ice and debris-covered
                                         glaciers using satellite images




                                                                                                                            9
     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



                                        Figure 3.4: Steps used in CI delineation




                                       Figure 3.5: Steps used in DC delineation




10
                                                                    3 Data Collection and Glacier Mapping Methodology



Glacier inventory

The CI and DC glacier polygons derived from the above processes were then merged into a single polygon layer. A
GLIMS ID was assigned at the centre of each glacier polygon. When combined with a DEM, glacier outlines serve
to derive glacier parameters such as aspect, slope, and hypsometry. The post-classification data management and
parameterisation were carried out in an ArcGIS platform. Additional data sets like topographic maps were used to
derive some important attributes which were then inserted into the glacier database.

Glacier Area Analysis

HKH basin boundary

Meltwater from the snow and ice of the HKH region feeds the ten largest river systems in South Asia: the Amu Darya,
Brahmaputra, Ganges, Indus, Irrawaddy, Mekong, Salween, Tarim Interior, Yangtze, and Yellow (Figure 3.7). Thus it
is important to understand the dynamics of the glacial environment in the river watersheds for assessments of climate
change impacts and adaptation measures.

The watershed boundaries of the river basins were delineated using the SRTM DEM and the ArcHydro tool,
developed as an add-on to ArcGIS Software. The results were refined manually by backdropping the 30 m
resolution Landsat images. The improved results were further verified and refined on high resolution (mostly 1 m)
images in Google Earth. The ten major basins were further divided into basins and sub-basins, particularly in the
glaciated region. A further area was delineated which lies between the major basins, the Qinghai-Tibetan Interior.
Water from this area remains on the plateau and does not drain into the major river systems.

Different reports give different values for the areas of the ten major river basins; this is the result of different projection
systems being used as well as some differences in the boundary delineation. The present study used the Universal




                           Figure 3.6: Successive steps used to delineate glacier boundaries




                        a. Landsat image FCC 742                 b. Automatic delineation of
                                                                    clean ice polygons




                        c. Generalisation of polygons            d. Spline




                                            e. Final glacier polygons
                                                                                                                                  11
     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region


                    Figure 3.7: The ten major river basins in the Hindu Kush-Himalayas




                  Figure 3.8: The UTM zones in the basins of the Hindu Kush-Himalayas




12
                                                                    3 Data Collection and Glacier Mapping Methodology



Transverse Mercator (UTM) WGS 84 projection                     Table 3.1: Total area of major basins and area within
system for glacier mapping because the base satellite           HKH region
imagery (Landsat) was provided in this projection
                                                                                               Area                Area in HKH
system. In the UTM WGS 84 projection system, the                Major Basins
                                                                                               (km2)               (km2)
HKH region falls into Zone 41N to 48N (Figure 3.8).             Amu Darya                              645,726           166,686
Using this projection system, the area of the HKH               Indus                              1,116,086             555,450
region was calculated to be 4,192,446 km2, of which             Ganges                             1,001,019             244,806
2,795,898 km2 falls within the ten major basins and             Brahmaputra                            528,079           432,480
a further 909,824 km2 in the Qinghai-Tibetan Interior
                                                                Irrawaddy                              426,501           202,745
(Table 3.1). The remaining 486,725 km2 comprises
                                                                Salween                                363,778           211,122
areas of barren, rugged mountains in Pakistan. The
                                                                Mekong                                 841,322           138,876
glacier area was analysed in each of the basins and
                                                                Yangtze                            2,065,763             565,102
sub-basins.
                                                                Yellow                             1,073,168             250,540
                                                                Tarim Interior                         929,003            26,729
Limitations
                                                                Qinghai Tibetan Interior                   NA            909,824
                                                                                       Total        8,990,445           3,705,721
The part of the glacier database for areas within all
                                                                Note: Total HKH area is 4,192,446 km2; 486,725 km2 of the area
countries except China was prepared at ICIMOD
                                                                lies outside the ten major basins and the interior basin
using the uniform methodology described above. The
inventory for the areas lying in China were analysed
by the Cold and Arid Regions Environmental and Engineering Research Institute (CAREERI) under a collaborative
arrangement, with the data provided to ICIMOD for the purpose of preparing this regional status report. The details
of this part of the inventory will be published separately by CAREERI following the completion of the updated
version of the Chinese glacier inventory. Of the 54,000 glaciers identified in the inventory, 45% were in China.
The inventory data from China used a different methodology for delineating basins and sub-basins based on the
original Technical Temporary Secretariat (TTS) methodology (TTS 1978). The dataset did not distinguish between CI
and DC glaciers, included glaciers equal to and larger than 0.01 km2. There were also differences in the definition
of basin boundaries in the China part between the Chinese data and that prepared at ICIMOD. All of these pose
a challenge to uniformity in this status report. In order to resolve the above issues as far as possible, the study
reconciled the data from China for the Brahmaputra, Ganges, and Indus river basins, and left the major basins that
are entirely in China as they were provided without a sub-basin level differentiation.




                                                                                                                                    13
                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




     4 Glacier Inventory Attributes


     Each glacier entity must have a unique identification code. In the earlier ICIMOD inventory, this code was related
     to the hydrological unit of first and lower order basins. In the present inventory, a GLIMS ID was generated from the
     coordinates of the glacier in geographic projection (latitude and longitude). The hydrological IDs used in previous
     inventories were correlated with the present inventory IDs to the extent possible. Eleven attribute parameters were
     assigned to each glacier: hydrological ID, GLIMS ID, location (latitude/longitude), area, elevation, aspect, average
     slope, mean glacier thickness, estimated ice reserve, six digit classification (TTS), and morphological classification.

     Hydrological ID

     The hydrological ID is assigned by numbering the glaciers starting from the outlet of the major stream and
     proceeding clockwise around the basin through each significant small tributary. The coding system is based on that
     used in the World Glacier Inventory. For example, Kdugr10_106 stands for Koshi (K), Dudh Koshi (du), glacier (gr),
     data of 2010 (10), and individual glacier number 106.

     GLIMS ID

     The GLIMS ID is based on the longitude and latitude location of a centre point in the polygon of the glacier. The
     GLIMS ID is a 14 digit code including G for Global, E for East and N for North. The latitude and longitude should
     be in degrees defined to three decimal places (e.g., G086700E28016N).

     Location (latitude and longitude)

     The location of the glacier was described using the central coordinates (latitude and longitude) of the glacier
     polygon. The latitude and longitude are stored in degrees defined to three decimal places. The centroid of the
     glacier polygon was generated automatically, if the central point was in a rocky outcrop (glacier void), the points
     were shifted manually to the nearest point inside the glacier polygon

     Area

     The surface area of a glacier is a very sensitive parameter as it is used in a wide range of applications including
     global scaling up of glacier area. The area and perimeter of CI and DC glacier polygons were derived
     automatically using the GIS (geographical information system) software. The glacier area was derived in square
     kilometres to three decimal places using a metric projection (like UTM). The glaciers were only mapped if their area
     was larger than 0.02 km2. The glacier areas were divided into five classes: class 1 ≤0.5 km2; class 2 = 0.51 to
     1.00 km2; class 3 = 1.01 to 5.00 km2; class 4 = 5.01 to 10.00 km2 and class 5 ≥10.00 km2.

     The area of valley glaciers is generally large, as they extend from the mountains into the valleys; their ice reserves
     are proportionately even larger as ice thickness increases with increase in the glacier area.

     Elevation

     The highest and lowest elevations of CI and DC glaciers were derived from the digital elevation model for each
     glacier. The glacier elevation was divided into highest elevation (the elevation of the glacier crown) derived from the
     clean-ice, and lowest elevation (elevation at toe of the glacier) derived from the debris-covered ice, or when debris-


14
                                                               4 Glacier Inventory Attributes



covered ice was not present then from the clean-ice,                   Figure 4.1: The eight cardinal directions of aspect
and mean elevation (the arithmetic mean value of
the highest glacier elevation and the lowest glacier                                            N
elevation), measured in metres above sea level (masl).
                                                                            NW                                   NE
Aspect

Aspect is an important parameter for all kinds of
modelling. The mean aspect was derived from a
DEM as the average value of all the individual cells
covered by the glacier. Aspect is a circular (directional)        W                                                       E
parameter and mean aspect values must be derived
by a decomposition into the respective sine and cosine
values (cf. Manley 2008). The calculated value is
transformed to the eight cardinal directions (N, NE,
E, SE, S, SW, W, and NW) (Figure 4.1). Each                                SW                                   SE
cardinal direction has a range of 45 degrees, half
to each side, as shown in the figure. Some glaciers                                             S
are ice caps forming an apron around a peak and
thus sloping in all directions; such glaciers were
represented as ‘open’. The orientations of CI and DC
type glaciers in the compound basins can be different.

Mean slope

The mean slope was derived for each glacier from the DEM; it is independent of glacier length and refers to all
individual cells of the DEM within the glacier boundary (cf. Manley 2008). The mean slope is a rough proxy for
other parameters like mean thickness (cf. Haeberli and Hoelzle 1995) and also relates to other dynamic measures,
such as surface flow speed. The glaciers on steep slopes are generally more unsTable as a result of the higher flow
velocity; those with maximum slope correspond to icefalls. It is strongly recommended to include the DEM-derived
mean slope value in a basic inventory (Paul et.al. 2009).

The mean slope was calculated for the CI and DC components of each glacier separately wherever both were
available. The mean slope was divided into seven classes at intervals of 10°.

Mean glacier thickness

There are no measurements of glacial ice thickness for the southern flank of the Himalayas. Measurements of glacial
ice thickness in the northern flank (Tianshan Mountains, China) have shown that the glacial thickness increases with
area (LIGG/WECS/NEA 1988; Mool et al. 2001a,b; Shi et al. 2008). The relationship between ice thickness (H)
and glacial area (F) was obtained using the empirical formula
     H = –11.32 + 53.21 F0.3
This scaling formula was used to estimate the mean ice thickness of the glaciers. However, the value is a tentative
figure and highly uncertain, since surface slope, annual mass balance, and many other attributes affect ice thickness.

Estimated ice reserves

The ice reserves were estimated from the mean ice thickness multiplied by the glacial area. The value is also highly
uncertain as it is derived from the already highly uncertain glacier thickness. Surface slope, annual mass balance,
and many other attributes affect the ice thickness and ice reserve values. The ice thickness and ice reserve were
included despite the high uncertainty as they are the main component of ice mass and the only information available
until such time as actual measurements can be carried out.


                                                                                                                         15
                     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     Six-digit morphological classification

     A morphological matrix-type classification and description was also used in the study in line with the classification
     proposed by Müller et al. (1977) for the TTS to use in the WGI. Each glacier was coded as a six-digit number,
     one digit for each of six different morphological characteristics. The scheme is shown in Table 4.1; the individual
     numbers for each digit (horizontal row numbers) are read on the left-hand side. This scheme is a simple key used in
     the classification of glaciers all over the world.

     The glacier classification used by the World Glacier Monitoring Service was used for the overall morphological
     classification (WGMS 1989). The glaciers were divided into different types using a combination of Digit 1 ‘primary
     classification’ and Digit 2 ‘form’ from the six-digit classification. Generally, six types of glacier were observed in
     the Hindu Kush-Himalayas – valley troughs, and five types of mountain glacier (ice caps, ice apron, cirque, niche,
     and basin). Ice caps were disaggregated into their components and these were then analysed individually. When
     the morphology was unclear, the glacier was characterised as a mountain glacier ‘miscellaneous’ type. The classes
     are often not unique and different analysts might choose a different type. In regions of rapid glacier change (e.g.,
     with formation of pro-glacial lakes) the classification might also change in just a few years so that updating of the
     database is a continuous effort.

     Mountain glaciers commonly have a hanging profile; the major sources of nourishment are drift snow and direct
     snowfall. Small mountain glaciers are generally poorly represented in glacier studies but are of considerable
     importance in the study of climate change impact on water resources. Mountain glaciers, often with a hanging
     profile, were the most common type identified in the HKH inventory in terms of number. However, the area and
     estimated ice thickness, and thus estimated ice reserves, were comparatively low.

     Valley type glaciers have a regular longitudinal profile from crown to terminus (snout). The profile is concave, with
     steeper slopes in the upper levels and less steep slopes in the lower parts. The part of the valley glacier at the head
     has the characteristics of a mountain glacier, but due to its continuation, the whole ice mass is considered to be a
     valley glacier. Valley type glaciers are mainly nourished by snow and drift snow in the accumulation zone and snow
     and ice avalanches in the lower valley. A large accumulation area is normally needed for a glacier to be able to
     extend far into the valleys. Hence, the average area of valley glaciers is usually higher than that of mountain glaciers
     and although few in number, they contribute most to glacier area and ice reserves.

     Basin glaciers, whether mountain or valley type, can have a clean-ice (CI) or debris-covered (DC) surface. Mountain
     glaciers tend to be CI type, whereas valley glaciers have a CI component mostly in the accumulation zone and
     DC component in the ablation zone. CI glaciers generally have steeper slopes than DC glaciers. The CI and DC
     components were also mapped and the glacier attributes derived separately.


     Table 4.1: Classification and description of glaciers

     Digit 1                            Digit 2                 Digit 3          Digit 4         Digit 5                  Digit 6
                                                                Frontal          Longitudinal    Major source of
     Primary classification             Form                                                                              Activity of tongue
                                                                characteristic   profile         nourishment
                                        Uncertain or            Normal or        Uncertain or    Uncertain or
     Uncertain or miscellaneous                                                                                           Uncertain
                                        miscellaneous           miscellaneous    miscellaneous   miscellaneous
     Continental ice sheet              Compound basins         Piedmont         Even: regular   Snow and/or drift snow   Marked retreat
     Ice field                          Compound basin          Expanded foot    Hanging         Avalanche and/or snow    Slight retreat
     Ice cap                            Simple basin            Lobed            Cascading       Superimposed ice         Stationary
     Outlet glacier                     Cirque                  Calving          Ice fall                                 Slight advance
     Valley glacier                     Niche                   Confluent        Interrupted                              Marked advance
      Mountain glacier                  Crater                                                                            Possible surge
      Glacieret and snow field          Ice apron                                                                         Known surge
      Ice shelf                         Group                                                                             Oscillating
      Rock glacier                      Remnant



16
            5 Amu Darya Basin




Part 2

Status of Glaciers




                                17
                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




     5 Amu Darya Basin


     The Amu Darya river originates in Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan in two headstreams, the Panj and Vakhsh rivers. The
     river flows west-northwest into the Aral Sea and is one of the longest rivers in Central Asia: 2,540 km measured
     from the remotest sources of the Panj river. The catchment area is about 645,726 km2. The Amu Darya river forms
     a part of Afghanistan’s border with Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan, and a part of Uzbekistan’s border with
     Turkmenistan. The part of the Amu Darya river basin within the HKH region lies entirely within Afghanistan, covering
     an area of about 166,686 km2, a quarter of the total basin area.

     Data
     The mapping and inventory of the glaciated areas in the sub-basins of the Amu Darya basin within the territory
     of Afghanistan was carried out using ETM+ images from 2005 and 2006. The topographic characteristics were
     derived using the SRTM DEM. The list of images used is shown in Table 5.1.

     Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers
     The part of the Amu Darya river basin within Afghanistan consists of three major sub-basins: the Wakhan, Kokcha,
     and Surkhab (Figure 5.1). The glaciers are distributed between 34.58° and 38.35° N latitude and 67.63° and
     74.88° E longitude, with the highest concentration between 36.45° and 38.35° N latitude and 70.65° and
     74.88° E longitude in the Wakhan sub-basin. The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin
     are summarised in Table 5.2.

     Number, area, and ice reserves
     The Amu Darya basin had 3,277 glaciers (2,047 in the Wakhan sub-basin, 913 in the Kokcha sub-basin, and 317
     in the Surkhab sub-basin) with a total area of 2,566 km2 and estimated ice reserves of 163 km3 (Table 5.2 and
     Figure 5.2).

     The Wakhan is the third largest sub-basin in Afghanistan but the most glaciated, with 76% of the total glaciated
     area, the largest number of CI and DC glaciers, the largest ice reserves (82% of the total), the longest glacier, the
     largest glacier, and the glacier with the greatest elevation difference.

     Glacier area classes
     The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are summarised in Table 5.3
     and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 5.3. The area per glacier in the different sub-basins ranged from
     0.35 km2 to 0.95 km2, with an average of 0.78 km2 overall (Table 5.2). The majority of glaciers (67%) were in
     the smallest class 1 (≤0.5 km2), and contributed 16% of the glacier area and 6% of the ice reserves. These small


      Table 5.1: Landsat images used for the Amu Darya basin

      Path-Row      Image                                           Date         Used for         Sub-basin
      150-34        LE71500342005259PFS00                           16/09/2005   correction       Wakhan
      151-34        LE71510342005234PFS00                           22/08/2005   correction       Wakhan
      152-33        LE71520332006212ASN00                           31/07/2006   analysis         Wakhan
      152-34        LE71520342006212ASN00                           31/07/2006   analysis         Wakhan, Kokcha, Surkhab
      152-35        LE71520352006260PFS01                           17/09/2006   analysis         Kokcha



18
                                                                    5 Amu Darya Basin


                               Figure 5.1: Distribution of glaciers in the Amu Darya basin




Table 5.2: Glacier characteristics in the sub-basins of the Amu Darya basin within the HKH region

Parameter                       Unit            Sub-basin                                                   Amu Darya
                                                Wakhan                Kokcha             Surkhab
Basin area                      km2                      27,173                21,338              37,913        166,686*
Latitude                        degrees             36.45-38.35           35.45-37.22       34.56-36.48        34.58-38.35
Longitude                       degrees             70.65-74.88           70.11-71.63       67.63-70.49        67.63-74.88
Number of glaciers              unit                        2,047                  913               317            3,277
CI glacier area                 km2                    1,878.48                430.11               97.00        2,405.59
DC glacier area                 km2                         72.57                72.99              15.03          160.59
Total glacier area              km2                    1,951.05                503.10              112.03        2,566.18
Largest glacier area            km2                         39.72                 9.36               9.82           39.72
Total ice reserves              km3                      133.56                  24.27               4.48          162.61
Highest elevation               masl                        7,213                6,790              5639            7,213
Lowest elevation                masl                        3,131                3,616              3,621           3,131
CI glacier elevation            masl                3,415-7,213           3,990-6,790       3,888-5,639        3,415-7,213
DC glacier elevation            masl                3,131-5,425           3,616-5,466       3,621-4,998        3,131-5,466
Mean CI glacier slope           degrees                       24                    26                24                25
Mean DC glacier slope           degrees                       10                    13                12                11
CI-DC area ratio                unit                        25.89                 5.89               6.46           14.98
Average glacier area            km2                          0.95                 0.55               0.35            0.78
*Area including not glaciated sub-basins




                                                                                                                             19
                  The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     Table 5.3: Glacier area classes in the Amu Darya basin within the HKH region

                                                                                                                                Mean area
                     Area                   Number                            Area                    Estimated ice reserves
     Area class                                                                                                                 per glacier
                     (km2)
                                            Total           %                 km2         %           km3           %           km2
     1                           ≤ 0.5           2,203             67.2         415.31         16.2         9.807         6.0          0.19
     2                       0.51-1.00               523           16.0         371.42         14.5      13.764           8.5          0.71
     3                       1.01-5.00               474           14.5         969.78         37.8      55.612          34.2          2.05
     4                    5.01-10.00                  50             1.5        345.06         13.5      29.092          17.9          6.90
     5                         ≥10.00                 27             0.8        464.62         18.1      54.334          33.4         17.21
                                    Total           3,277           100        2,566.18         100     162.609           100          0.78



     glaciers are very sensitive to changes in climate. Glaciers in class 3 (1.0 to 5.0 km2) were third highest in number
     but had the greatest area (38% of the total) and estimated ice reserves (34% of the total). The large glaciers in class
     5 (≥10.0 km2) had an average area of 17.21 km2 and contributed about 18% of the glacier area and 33% of the
     ice reserves.

     The largest glacier was GLIMS ID G072586E36890N (Awagr10_1022), located in the Wakhan sub-basin
     (36.89° N latitude and 72.59° E longitude). It had an area of 39.72 km2 and estimated ice reserves of 5.93 km3,
     and extended from 6,293 masl to 3,131 masl, the lowest terminus in Afghanistan. The highest elevation glacier was
     GLIMS ID G071765E36445N (Awagr10_1198), with a crown at 7,213 masl, glacier area of 17.40 km2, and
     estimated ice reserves of 1.98 km3.

     Glacier elevation

     The elevation of Afghanistan’s land area ranges from 7,485 masl at the peak of Noshak mountain to 258 masl
     in the Amu Darya river valley. The highest glacier elevation was 7,213 masl and the lowest 3,131 masl, both in
     the Wakhan sub-basin. The extended elevation range in the Wakhan sub-basin reflects the presence of valley type
     glaciers. CI glaciers were found from 7,213 to 3,415 masl and DC glaciers from 5,466 to 3,131 masl (Figure
     5.4). The lower extension of DC glaciers indicates the presence of basin type glaciers.




Figure 5.2: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                                       Figure 5.3: Percentage of glacier number, area,
reserves in the sub-basins of the Amu Darya basin                                            and estimated ice reserves in the different
                                                                                            glacier size classes in the Amu Darya basin




20
                                                               5 Amu Darya Basin



Glacier aspect

The glaciers in the Amu Darya basin are mostly concentrated in the northeastern part of the country in the Wakhan
corridor, which is a NE-SW elongated valley. Many of the other glaciers in Afghanistan are similarly situated in
tectonic valleys, and this has a strong influence on glacier aspect.

Figure 5.5 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. Close to 21% of the glaciers had
an east aspect, about 16% a southeast aspect, around 13 to 14% a northeast, south, southwest, or west aspect, 8%
a northwest aspect, and only a very few glaciers (all within the Kokcha and Surkhab sub-basins) a north aspect.

Slope

The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to 50°, with slopes of 20° to 30° most common and
40° to 50° least common in all cardinal directions. A negligible number had mean slopes less than 10° or above
50° (Figure 5.5).

The mean slope of the CI glaciers ranged from 24° to 26°, and of DC glaciers from 10° to 13° with slight basin-to-
basin variations (Figure 5.6). These ranges are fairly typical for the HKH region.

Morphological glacier type

The morphological classification of glaciers in the Amu Darya basin is summarised in Table 5.4; the comparative
distribution by number, area, and estimated ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure 5.7.

Just over 94% of the glaciers were identified as mountain type, the vast majority of them mountain basin type.
Mountain glaciers had average areas ranging from 0.08 to 0.55 km2, covered 57% of the total glacier area, and
contained 38% of the total ice reserves.

The valley glaciers in the Amu Darya basin have both compound basins and simple basins. The ice reserves of the
valley glaciers are generally large because ice thickness increases with glacial area. The valley glaciers comprised
less than 6% of the total by number, but with an average area of 5.79 km2, contributed almost 43% of the total
glacier area and 62% of the total ice reserves (Table 5.4, Figure 5.7).




 Figure 5.4: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers                          Figure 5.5: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
 in the sub-basins of the Amu Darya basin                                        in the Amu Darya basin




                                                                                                                       21
                        The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



         Table 5.4: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Amu Darya basin

         Glacier type                             Number                            Area                     Estimated ice reserves   Mean area
                                                                                                                                      per glacier

                                                  Total           %                 km2          %           km3          %           km2
                        Miscellaneous                       0             0.0             0.00         0.0      0.000           0.0         0.00
                        Ice apron                         500           15.3          67.20            2.6      1.512           0.9         0.13

             Mountain
                        Cirque                             18             0.6             1.81         0.1      0.033          0.02         0.10
                        Niche                              48           1.56              3.70         0.1      0.061          0.04         0.08
                        Basin                         2,521             76.9        1,393.32         54.3      59.741          36.7         0.55
         Valley         Trough                            190             5.8       1,100.14         42.9     101.262          62.3         5.79
                                          Total        3,277             100        2,566.18         100.0    162.609           100         0.78




     Figure 5.6: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers                                                 Figure 5.7: Comparative distribution of different
       in the sub-basins of the Amu Darya basin                                                       glacier types in the Amu Darya basin by
                                                                                                     number, area, and estimated ice reserves




Figure 5.8: Percentage distribution by area of CI and DC                                       Figure 5.9: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers in the
   glaciers in the sub-basins of the Amu Darya basin                                         sub-basins of the Amu Darya basin within the HKH region




    22
                                                             5 Amu Darya Basin



Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers

Only 282 (9%) of the 3,277 glaciers in the basin had both CI and DC components. In total, 160 km2 or 6% of the
total glacier area was debris covered. The lowest DC area was found in the Wakhan basin and the highest in the
Surkhab basin (Figure 5.8).

Hypsography

The glacier area-altitude distribution in the three sub-basins is shown in Figure 5.9. The maximum glaciated areas
were 232.22 km2 at 5,000-5,100 masl in the Wakhan sub-basin, 75.81 km2 at 4,900-5,000 masl in the Kokcha
sub-basin, and 17.41 km2 at 4,800-4,900 masl in the Surkhab sub-basin. The Wakhan sub-basin had the highest
elevation band (7,200 masl) followed by the Kokcha sub-basin (6,700 masl). The Wakhan sub-basin showed a
distinctive bimodal area-altitude distribution.




                                                                                                                     23
                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




  6 Indus Basin


  The Indus river (the ‘Father River’) is one of the major rivers flowing through the Indian subcontinent. The river
  originates from the Tibetan plateau in the vicinity of Lake Mansarovar in the Tibet Autonomous Region of China and
  flows first to the northwest, turns southwest at Gilgit in Pakistan, and then flows south and southwest through the
  country (Figure 6.1). The river has a total basin area of 1,116,086 km2, of which 555,450 km2 lies within the HKH
  region. The river has an estimated annual flow of around 207 km3, the twenty-first highest in the world.

  The Indus river is the main source of water in Pakistan. For the purposes of the present study, the upper reaches of
  the major Indus river basin were divided into three basins – the Kabul, Upper Indus, and Panjnad (Figure 6.1). The
  Kabul basin includes the Panjsher-Ghorband, Alingar-Alishing-Nuristan, Kunar, and Swat sub-basins; the Upper
  Indus basin includes the Gilgit, Hunza, Shigar, Shyok, Zanskar, Shingo, Astor, and Upper Indus sub-basins; and the
  Panjnad basin includes the Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Beas, and Sutlej sub-basins.




Figure 6.1: The Indus river system showing the basins and sub-basins in the upper reaches and distribution of glaciers




   Kabul basin                           Upper Indus basin*                                     Panjnad basin*
   1. Panjsher-Ghorband                  5. Gilgit                           9. Zanskar         13. Jhelum
   2. Alingar-Alishing-Nuristan          6. Hunza                            10. Shingo         14. Chenab
   3. Kunar                              7. Shigar                           11. Astor          15. Ravi
   4. Swat                               8. Shyok*                           12. Upper Indus*   16. Beas
                                                                                                17. Sutlej*
24 *drainage catchment partly in China
                                                               6 Indus Basin



Data

The mapping and inventory of the glaciated areas in the Indus basin was carried out using ETM+ images from
2004 to 2009 (and some earlier images for correction). The list of images is shown in Table 6.1. The topographic
characteristics were derived using the SRTM DEM. The list of images used is shown in Table 6.1

Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

The glaciers in the Indus basin were distributed between 30.45° and 37.08° N latitude and 69.36° and 81.65° E
longitude (Figure 6.1). The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table
6.2. The basin had a total of 18,495 glaciers with an area of 21,192 km2 and estimated ice reserves of
2,696 km3. The elevation ranged from 8,566 masl to 2,409 masl, the lowest elevation of all the glaciers in the
HKH region. This basin also contains the largest glacier in the HKH region: the Siachen glacier, which covers about
926 km2.


Table 6.1: Landsat images used for the Indus basin

Path-Row    Image                        Date                 Used for         Sub-basin
            LE71530362006267PFS00        24/09/2006           analysis
153-36      LE71530362009275SGS00        02/10/2009           correction       Panjsher-Ghorband
            LE71530362001237SGS00        25/08/2001           correction
152-35      LE71520352006260PFS01        17/09/2006           analysis         Kunar, Alingar-Alishing-Nuristan
            LE71510352006189ASN00        08/07/2006           analysis
151-35      LE71500352007256PFS01        13/09/2007           analysis         Gilgit, Swat, Kunar
            LE71510352007192ASN00        25/08/2007           analysis
            LE71510342005234PFS00        22/08/2005           analysis
151-34                                                                         Kunar
            LE71510342008259SGS00        15/09/2008           analysis
150-36      LE71500362005259PFS00        16/09/2005           analysis         Upper Indus, Jhelum
150-35      LE71500362005259PFS00        16/09/2005           analysis         Jhelum, Gilgit, Hunza, Upper Indus, Kunar
150-34      LE71500342005259PFS00        16/09/2005           analysis         Gilgit, Hunza, Kunar
            L71149037_03720041024        10/24/2004           analysis
            LE71490372002324SGS00        11/20/2001           correction
149- 37                                                                        Jhelum, Chenab
            LE71490372008277PFS00        10/3/2008            analysis
            LE71490372009263SGS00        9/20/2009            analysis
            L71149036_03620071102        11/2/2007            analysis
                                                                               Shingo, Upper Indus, Chenab, Jhelum, Upper
149-36      LE71490362002276SGS00        10/3/2002            correction
                                                                               Indus
            LE71490362009263SGS00        9/20/2009            analysis
            LE71490352006207PFS00        26/07/2006           correction
149-35                                                                         Gilgit, Hunza, Shigar, Upper Indus
            LE71490352007258PFS00        15/09/2007           analysis
149-34      LE71490342006207PFS00        26/07/2006           analysis         Shyok
            L71148037_03720051020        10/20/2005           correction
            LE71480372007331SGS00        11/27/2007           analysis
148-37      LE71480372008206SGS00        7/24/2008            analysis         Zanskar, Upper Indus, Chenab
            LE71480372008238SGS00        8/25/2008            analysis
            LE71480372009272SGS00        9/29/2009            analysis
            L71148036_03620050902        9/2/2005             analysis
148-36      LE71480362006280PFS00        10/7/2006            analysis         Shyok, Zanskar, Shingo, Upper Indus
            LE71480362007331SGS00        11/27/2007           analysis
            LE71480352002221SGS00        8/9/2002             correction
148-35      LE71480352006312PFS00        11/8/2006            analysis         Shyok, Upper Indus, Shigar
            LE71480352009224SGS00        8/12/2009            analysis


                                                                                                                            25
                   The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     Table 6.1 continued

                   LE71470382004252PFS01                  9/8/2004             analysis
                   L71147038_03820051029                  10/29/2005           correction
                   LE71470382006273PFS00                  9/30/2006            analysis
     147-38        LE71470382007324PFS00                  11/20/2007           analysis     Sutlej, Ravi, Beas,
                   LE71470382008183PFS00                  7/1/2008             analysis
                   LE71470382008247ASN00                  9/3/2008             analysis
                   LE71470382009297SGS00                  10/24/2009           analysis
                   L71147037_03720060930                  9/30/2006            analysis
     147-37        LE71470372006273PFS00                  9/30/2006            analysis     Zanskar, Upper Indus, Chenab
                   LE71470372007228PFS00                  8/16/2007            analysis
     147-36        L71147036_03620060930                  9/30/2006            analysis
                   LE71470362007228PFS00                  8/16/2007            analysis
                                                                                            Shyok, Upper Indus
                   LE71470362008215ASN00                  8/2/2008             analysis
                   LE71470362009265ASN00                  9/22/2009            correction
                   L71147035_03520050826                  8/26/2005            analysis
     147-35        LE71470351999190SGS00                  7/9/1999             correction   Shyok
                   LE71470352009265ASN00                  9/22/2009            analysis
                   L71146038_03820060923                  9/23/2006            analysis
                   LE71460382000282SGS00                  1/8/2000             correction
     146-38        LE71460382006282ASN00                  10/9/2006            analysis     Sutlej
                   LE71460382008240SGS00                  8/27/2008            analysis
                   LE71460382001252SGS00                  9/9/2001             correction
                   L71146037_03720060923                  9/23/2006            correction
                   LE71460372007365ASN00                  12/31/2007           analysis
     146-37        LE71460372008240SGS00                  8/27/2008            analysis     Sutlej
                   LE71460372008256ASN00                  9/12/2008            analysis
                   LE71460372009178ASN00                  6/27/2009            analysis
                   L71146036_03620050904                  9/4/2005             correction
     146-36        LE71460362009226ASN00                  8/14/2009            analysis     Shyok
                   LE71460362009274ASN00                  10/1/2009            analysis



     Kabul basin

     The Kabul river is a major tributary of the Indus. It originates in Pakistan, traverses Afghanistan, and later merges
     with the Indus at Attock in Pakistan. It has four glaciated sub-basins: the Panjsher-Ghorband, Alingar-Alishing-
     Nuristan, Kunar, and Swat (Figure 6.2). The glaciers in the Kabul basin lie between 35.20° and 36.91° N latitude
     and 69.36° and 73.82° E longitude. The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are
     summarised in Table 6.3. The Kunar sub-basin has both the highest number and the largest glaciers.

     Number, area, and ice reserves – Altogether 1,601 glaciers were mapped in the Kabul basin (Table 6.2) with a total
     area of 1,722 km2 and estimated ice reserves of 183 km3 (Table 6.3). The Kunar sub-basin had the highest number
     and largest area of glaciers and the greatest estimated ice reserves (Figure 6.3). It also had the largest individual
     glacier in the Kabul basin, the compound basin type glacier GLIMS ID G073722E36798N (Kkugr10_322) with
     an area of 189.47 km2 extending from 6,077 to 3,715 masl.

     Glacier area classes – The number, area and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes is
     summarised in Table 6.4 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 6.4. The mean area per glacier was
     1.08 km2.The great majority of the glaciers (1,178) were in the smallest class, with only 28 and 26, respectively, in
     the largest two classes. The largest class 5 had 1.6% of the glacier number but contributed about 48% of the glacier
     area, and 74% of the estimated ice reserves.


26
                                                                        6 Indus Basin



Table 6.2: Glacier characteristics in the major Indus basin within the HKH region

Parameter                       Unit                 Basin                                                         Indus
                                                     Kabul                Upper Indus*          Panjnad*
Basin area                      km2                           94,291              173,213             133,552           555,450**
Latitude                        degrees                 35.20-36.91           31.10-37.08         30.45-35.10          30.45-37.08
Longitude                       degrees                 69.36-73.82           72.53-81.65         73.42-81.22          69.36-81.65
Number of glaciers              unit                           1,601               11,413                  5,481            18,495
CI glacier area                 km2                          1,561.73           13,459.11            3,610.19            18,631.04
DC glacier area                 km2                           159.96             1,399.40              410.22              1,969.58
Total glacier area              km2                          1,721.69           15,061.74            4,409.24            21,192.67
Largest glacier area            km2                           189.47                925.93             109.33               925.93
Total ice reserves              km3                           182.67             2,173.52              339.86              2,696.05
Highest elevation               masl                           7,578                    8,566              7,103              8,566
Lowest elevation                masl                           3,114                    2,409              3,001              2,409
CI glacier elevation            masl                    3,335-7,578           2,723-8,566         3,001-7,103          2,723-8,566
DC glacier elevation            masl                    3,114-5,447           2,409-5,666         3,115-5,913          2,409-5,913
Mean CI glacier slope           degrees                            25                     25                 27                     25
Mean DC glacier slope           degrees                             9                     10                 11                     10
CI-DE area ratio                unit                             9.76                    9.62               8.80               9.46
Average glacier area            km2                              1.08                    1.32               0.80               1.15
*Extends into China (area in China contains 1,274 glaciers with an area of 592 km2; CI/DC differentiation refers to the remaining
17,221 glaciers with an area of 20,600 km2); ** includes area of non-glaciated sub-basins




                                  Figure 6.2: Distribution of glaciers in the Kabul basin




                                                                                                                                         27
                   The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     Table 6.3: Glacier characteristics in the Kabul basin within the HKH region

                                                       Sub-basin

     Parameter                        Unit                               Alingar-                                                        Kabul
                                                       Panjsher-
                                                                         Alishing-             Kunar              Swat
                                                       Ghorband
                                                                         Nuristan
     Basin area                       km2                    29,823                  6,217             25,925            14,728              94,291*
     Latitude                         degrees           35.29-35.86            35.28-35.71      35.44-36.91          35.20-35.88          35.20-36.91
     Longitude                        degrees           69.36-70.29            69.92-70.54      70.55-73.82          72.05-72.79          69.36-73.82
     Number of glaciers               unit                         88                     37            1,149                 327                 1,601
     CI glacier area                  km 2
                                                              12.11                   4.67         1,419.95              125.00              1,561.73
     DC glacier area                  km2                      2.52                   1.15             153.93                 2.35               159.96
     Total glacier area               km 2
                                                              14.63                   5.82         1,573.89              127.35              1,721.69
     Largest glacier area             km 2
                                                               2.50                   1.45             189.47                 4.87               189.47
     Total ice reserves               km3                      0.44                   0.16             176.77                 5.30               182.67
     Highest elevation                masl                    5,242                  5,284              7,578                5,580                7,578
     Lowest elevation                 masl                    3,857                  4,162              3,114                3,772                3,114
     CI glacier elevation             masl              3,857-5,242            4,162-5,284      3,335-7,578          3,772-5,580          3,335-7,578
     DC glacier elevation             masl              4,224-4,788            4,363-4,658      3,114-5,447          3,872-4,408          3,114-5,447
     Mean CI glacier slope            degrees                      24                     27              25                   22                   25
     Mean DC glacier slope            degrees                       9                      9              11                    9                    9
     CI-DE area ratio                 unit                     4.81                   4.05               9.22                53.19                 9.76
     Average glacier area             km2                      0.17                   0.16               1.37                 0.39                 1.08
     * Includes area of non-glaciated sub-basins


     Table 6.4: Glacier area classes in the Kabul basin

     Area                                                                                                                                  Mean area
     class                             Number                             Area                            Estimated ice reserves
                   Area (km2)                                                                                                              per glacier
                                       Total             %                km2              %              km3            %                 km2
     1                       ≤ 0.5             1,178            73.6            204.31           11.9            4.691             2.6             0.17
     2                  0.51-1.00               183             11.4            126.34            7.3            4.633             2.5             0.69
     3                  1.01-5.00               186             11.6            376.82           21.9           21.542          11.8               2.03
     4                 5.01-10.00                28                1.8          195.99           11.4           16.666             9.1             7.00
     5                      ≥10.00               26                1.6          818.23           47.5       135.135             74.0              31.47
                              Total            1,601               100         1,721.69           100       182.667              100               1.08



 Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was 7,578 masl and the lowest 3,114 masl (Figure 6.5 and Table
 6.3), both in the Kunar sub-basin. CI glaciers were found from 7,578 to 3,335 masl and DC glaciers from 5,447
 to 3,114 masl.

 Glacier aspect – Figure 6.6 shows the percentage of glaciers in the Kabul basin with different aspects and mean
 slope. Almost 20% of the glaciers had an east aspect and a similar number a west aspect; around 15% of the
 glaciers had a southeast, south, or southwest aspect. Only 7 to 9% of glaciers had a northeast or northwest aspect,
 and less than 0.5% a north aspect.

 Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to 50°, with slopes of 20° to 30° most
 common and 40° to 50° least common in all cardinal directions (Figure 6.6).

 The mean slope of the CI glaciers ranged from 22° to 27° with an average of 25°; and those of the DC glaciers
 from 9° to 11° with an average of 9° (Figure 6.7 and Table 6.3).



28
                                                                 6 Indus Basin



Figure 6.3: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                    Figure 6.4: Percentage of glacier number, area,
   reserves in the sub-basins of the Kabul basin                          and estimated ice reserves in the different
                                                                            glacier size classes in the Kabul basin




    Figure 6.5: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers                                  Figure 6.6: Aspect and mean slope
       in the sub-basins of the Kabul basin                                         of glaciers in the Kabul basin




  Morphological glacier type – The morphological classification of glaciers in the Kabul basin is summarised in Table
  6.5; the comparative distribution by number, area, and estimated ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure 6.8.

  About 90% of the glaciers were identified as mountain type (ice apron, cirque, niche, and basin), the majority of
  them mountain basin type (61% of the total); 10% of the glaciers were valley type (Figure 6.8, Table 6.5). The
  mountain basin type glaciers had an average area of 0.44 km2, covered 25% of the total glacier area, and
  contained 9% of the total ice reserves. The valley trough type glaciers had an average area of 7.24 km2; covered
  71% of the total glacier area, and contained 89% of the total ice reserves.




                                                                                                                        29
                        The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



        Table 6.5: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Kabul basin

                                                                                                                                        Mean area
        Glacier type                              Number                            Area                      Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                                        per glacier
                                                  Total           %                 km2           %           km3           %           km2
                          Miscellaneous                      0             0.0             0.00         0.0         0.000         0.0         0.00
                          Ice apron                        288           18.0             62.33         3.6         2.049         1.1         0.22

             Mountain
                          Cirque                            36             2.3             6.76         0.4         0.171         0.1         0.19
                          Niche                            135             8.4             7.23         0.4         0.084         0.1         0.05
                          Basin                            974           60.8         428.86           24.9      17.112           9.4         0.44
        Valley            Trough                           168           10.5       1,216.51           70.7     163.251          89.4         7.24
                                          Total           1,601           100        1,721.69           100     182.667           100         1.08




     Figure 6.7: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers                                                 Figure 6.8: Comparative distribution of different
         in the sub-basins of the Kabul basin                                                       glacier types in the Kabul basin by number,
                                                                                                          area, and estimated ice reserves




Figure 6.9: Percentage distribution by area of CI and DC                                          Figure 6.10: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
      glaciers in the sub-basins of the Kabul basin                                                     in the sub-basins of the Kabul basin




   30
                                                               6 Indus Basin



Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – Figure 6.9 shows the percentage distribution of CI and DC glacier area in
the Kabul sub-basins. About 9% of the total glacier area was debris-covered (Table 6.3), with the highest proportion
being 20% in the Alingar-Alishing Nuristan sub-basin.

Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the four sub-basins is shown in Figure 6.10. The maximum
glaciated areas were 150.66 km2 at 4,900-5,000 masl in the Kunar sub-basin, 20.59 km2 at 4,500-4,600
masl in the Swat sub-basin, 2.73 km2 at 4,600-4,700 masl in the Panjsher-Ghorband sub-basin, and 1.70 km2 at
4,500-4,600 masl in the Alingar-Alishing Nuristan sub-basin. The Kunar sub-basin had the highest elevation band
(7,500 masl) followed by the Swat sub-basin (5,500 masl) (Figure 6.10).

Upper Indus basin

The Upper Indus basin intersects three countries: Pakistan, India, and China. Most of the glaciers are found in two
large northwesterly trending ranges each side of the basin (Figure 6.11). The distribution and characteristics of
the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 6.6. A part of the basin lies in China. Descriptions of the
typology, morphological classification, and hypsography of the 704 glaciers with an area of 203 km2 in this part of
the basin are not yet available and not included in the description here.

Number, area, and ice reserves – The Upper Indus basin had 11,413 glaciers with a total area of 15,061 km2 and
2,174 km3 of estimated ice reserves.

The number, area and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the Upper Indus sub-basins are shown in Figure 6.12.
The Shyok sub-basin had the most glaciers and largest ice reserves, and the Astor sub-basin the least. The glacier




                        Figure 6.11: Distribution of glaciers in the Upper Indus basin




                                                                                                                       31
32




     Table 6.6: Glacier characteristics in the sub-basins of the Upper Indus basin within the HKH region

     Parameter                 Unit          Sub-basin                                                                                                                                    Upper Indus
                                             Gilgit            Hunza             Shigar            Shyok*            Zanskar            Shingo            Astor            Upper Indus*

     Basin area                km2                    13,540           13,734              7,046           33,429            15,856            10,502              3,988         75,117       173,213
     Latitude                  degrees         35.80-36.91       36.05-37.08       35.41-36.07       33.60-35.68       32.54-34.12       33.80-35.17       34.80-35.64      31.10-36.04    31.10-37.08
     Longitude                 degrees         72.53-74.70       74.04-75.77       74.94-76.69       75.96-79.59       76.26-78.21       75.27-76.67       74.46-75.24      72.71-81.65    72.53-81.65
     Number of glaciers        unit                      968            1,384               439             3,357              1,197              882               372           2,814         11,413
     CI glacier area           km2                    857.33        2,344.04          1,984.83           5,548.78            926.99            588.42             208.71       1,000.01      13,459.11
     DC glacier area           km2                     81.00           409.56             389.22           372.03              48.53             24.26             30.88          43.93       1,399.40
     Total glacier area        km2                    938.33        2,753.88          2,374.05           5,937.72            975.51            612.68             239.59       1,229.98      15,061.74
     Largest glacier area      km2                     61.81           345.72             631.48           925.93              62.56             46.30             30.98          51.94         925.93
                                                                                                                                                                                                         The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




     Total ice reserves        km3                     71.32           310.61             601.94           981.70              82.13             42.88             16.88          66.06       2,173.52
     Highest elevation         masl                    7,730            7,749              8,566            7,803              6,368             7,027             8,032          7,820          8,566
     Lowest elevation          masl                    2,703            2,409              2,774            3,231              3,997             3,656             2,991          2,760          2,409
     CI glacier elevation      masl            2,840-7,730       2,723-7,749       3,395-8,566       3,646-7,803       4,133-6,368       3,656-7,027        3,367-8,032     3,149-7,820    2,723-8,566
     DC glacier elevation      masl            2,703-4,925       2,409-5,297       2,774-5,481       3,231-5,666       3,997-5,433       3,868-5,023        2,991-5,031     2,760-5,364    2,409-5,666
     Mean CI glacier slope     degrees                    23               27                29                26                25                22                22              24             25
     Mean DC glacier slope     degrees                    11               10                12                12                  9                 9               10              10             10
     CI-DC area ratio           unit                   10.58             5.72               5.10            14.91              19.10             24.26              6.76          22.76           9.62
     Average glacier area       km2                     0.97             1.99               5.41             1.77               0.81              0.69              0.64           0.44           1.32
     *Extends into China (area in China contains 704 glaciers with an area of 203 km2; CI/DC refer to the remaining 10,709 glaciers with an area of 14,858 km2)
     sub-basins
                                                                        6 Indus Basin



      area was much higher in the Shyok, Hunza, and Shigar sub-basins than in the other basins. Although the Shigar sub-
      basin had the second smallest number of glaciers, it had the third highest glacier area and second highest estimated
      ice reserves.

      The average area of individual glaciers in the Upper Indus basin was 1.3 km2 reflecting the large number of small
      glaciers; in the Shigar sub-basin the average glacier area was 5.4 km2.

      Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
      summarised in Table 6.7 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 6.13. Small Class 1 glaciers
      (≤0.5 km2) accounted for 71% of the total, but contributed less than 9% of the area and 2% of the estimated ice
      reserves. Glaciers in class 3 (1.0 to 5.0 km2) were second highest in number, total area, and estimated ice reserves.
      Class 5 (≥10.0 km2) had the smallest number of glaciers but contributed more than half of the glacier area and 83%
      of the estimated ice reserves. The average area of class 5 glaciers was 52.2 km2 compared to 1.3 km2 for the
      basin as a whole.

      Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was 8,566 in the Shigar sub-basin and the lowest 2,409 masl in
      the Hunza sub-basin (Table 6.6). The Shigar sub-basin had the widest range of glacier elevation and the Zanskar
      sub-basin the smallest (Figure 6.14). The majority of glaciers were found at elevations of 4,000 to 7,000 masl.

      Glacier aspect – Figure 6.15 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. Close to 20%
      of the glaciers had an east aspect, 17% southeast, 15% south, and 14% southwest. Less than 5% of glaciers had a
      north aspect.

       Table 6.7: Glacier area classes in the Upper Indus basin

                                                                                                                             Mean area
                    Area             Number                     Area                          Estimated ice reserves
       Area class                                                                                                            per glacier
                    (km2)
                                     Total           %          km2         %                 km3            %               km2
       1                    ≤0.5             8,052       70.6    1,430.23               9.5         33.138             1.5          0.18
       2              0.51-1.00              1,500       13.1    1,055.54               7.0         38.783             1.8          0.70
       3              1.01-5.00              1,513       13.3    3,142.41          20.9         179.305                8.3          2.08
       4             5.01-10.00               192         1.7    1,298.22               8.6     106.460                4.9          6.76
       5                ≥10.00                156         1.4    8,135.06          54.0       1,815.838           83.5             52.15
                             Total       11,413          100    15,061.46           100        2,173.524           100              1.32




Figure 6.12: The number, area, and estimated ice reserves                       Figure 6.13: Percentage of glacier number, area,
   of glaciers in the sub-basins of the Upper Indus basin                       and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
                                                                                      size classes in the Upper Indus basin




                                                                                                                                           33
                       The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



           Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from less than 10° to 60° (Figure 6.15), with slopes of
           10° to 40° most common, except for glaciers with a northern aspect very few of which had slopes of less than 20°;
           less than 2% of glaciers had slopes of 40° to 60°.

           The mean slope of the CI glaciers ranged from 22° to 29° (Figure 6.16), with an average of 25°, higher than
           in other basins and consistent with a greater dominance of mountain glaciers. The mean slope of the DC glaciers
           ranged from 9° to 12°, with an average of 10°.

           Morphological glacier type – The morphological classification of glaciers in the Upper Indus basin is summarised in
           Table 6.8; the comparative distribution by number, area, and estimated ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure
           6.17. Altogether 10,709 of the 11,413 glaciers were classified morphologically.




           Figure 6.14: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers                                 Figure 6.15: Aspect and mean slope of
              in the sub-basins of Upper Indus basin                                       glaciers in the Upper Indus basin




Excluding glaciers in China




        Figure 6.16: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers                              Figure 6.17: Comparative distribution of different
          in the sub-basins of the Upper Indus basin                               glacier types in the Upper Indus basin by number,
                                                                                            area, and estimated ice reserves




      34
Excluding glaciers in China
                                                                                6 Indus Basin



       Just over 85% of the glaciers were identified as mountain type, of which 52% were mountain basin type and 29%
       ice apron type. Mountain basin type glaciers covered 27% of the glacier area and contained 10% of the estimated
       ice reserves (Table 6.8).

       The valley glaciers in the region have both compound basins and simple basins Only 13% of the glaciers were
       valley trough type, but they contributed 67% of the total glacier area and 88% of the ice reserves. Basin type
       glaciers, valley trough and mountain basin together, covered altogether 94% of the glacier area and contained
       98% of the estimated ice reserves. This reflects the maturity of these mountains compared to the relatively young
       Himalayan range. The average area of the mountain basin type glaciers was 0.73 km2 and of valley troughs
       6.88 km2.

       Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – About 13% of the total glacier area was debris-covered, with percentages in
       the different sub-basins ranging from 2% (Shingo and Upper Indus) to 16% (Shigar) (Figure 6.18).

       Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the sub-basins is shown in Figure 6.19. More than 500 km2
       of the total 1500 km2 glaciated area lay within the elevation zone from 4,600-6,000 masl. The maximum glaciated
       areas were 589 km2 at 5,700-5,800 masl in the Shyok sub-basin; 197 km2 at 5,100-5,200 masl in the Hunza
       sub-basin; 170 km2 at 5,000-5,100 masl in the Shigar sub-basin; 130 km2 at 5,400-5,500 masl in the Zanskar


        Table 6.8: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Upper Indus basin*

        Glacier type                      Number                     Area                             Estimated ice reserves         Mean area
                                                                                                                                     per glacier
                                          Total           %          km2            %                 km3            %               km2
                      Miscellaneous                 17         0.2           7.61               0.1          0.352        0.02             0.45
                      Ice apron                   3,104       29.0         763.85               5.1         47.295             2.2         0.25

           Mountain
                      Cirque                       121         1.1          28.56               0.2          0.787        0.04             0.24
                      Niche                        424         4.0          41.82               0.3          1.095        0.05             0.10
                      Basin                       5,598       52.3    4,081.34             27.5         216.713           10.0             0.73
        Valley        Trough                      1,445       13.5    9,935.49             66.9       1,899.280           87.7             6.88
                                  Total       10,709          100    14,858.67              100        2,165.522           100             1.39
        * Excluding glaciers in China




  Figure 6.18: Percentage distribution by area of CI and                                        Figure 6.19: Area-altitude distribution
    DC glaciers in sub-basins of the Upper Indus basin                                           of glaciers in the Upper Indus basin




Excluding glaciers in China                                                     Excluding glaciers in China                                        35
                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     sub-basin; 100 km2 at 4,800-4,900 masl in the Gilgit sub-basin; 75 km2 at 4,700 to 4,800 masl in the Upper
     Indus sub-basin; 64 km2 at 5,200-5,300 masl in the Shingo sub-basin; and 27 km2 at 4,600-4,700 masl in the
     Astor sub-basin.

     Panjnad basin

     The main glaciated sub-basins of the Panjnad basin are the Jhelum, Chenab, Ravi, Beas, and Sutlej (Figure 6.20). A
     part of the Sutlej sub-basin lies within the territory of China. Descriptions of the typology, morphological classification,
     and hypsography of the 827 glaciers in this part of the basin are not yet available and not included in the
     description here.

     The glaciers in the Panjnad basin are distributed in the northern part of the watershed between latitudes 30.45° and
     35.12° N and longitudes 73.42° and 81.22° E (Figure 6.20). High concentrations of glaciers were particularly
     prominent in the Chenab and Beas sub-basins; the glaciers elsewhere are more scattered.

     The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 6.6.

     Number, area, and ice reserves – The Panjnad basin had 5,481 glaciers with a total area of 4,409 km2 and
     estimated ice reserves of 340 km3 (Table 6.9).

     The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the Panjnad sub-basins are shown in Figure 6.21. The
     Sutlej and Chenab sub-basins both had more than 2,000 glaciers. The Chenab sub-basin had the greatest glaciated
     area and estimated ice reserves. It also had the largest individual glacier in the Panjnad basin, the compound basin
     type valley glacier GLIMS ID G077681E32169N (Pchgr10_941) with an area of 109.33 km2 extending from
     6,268 masl to 3,904 masl




                                       Figure 6.20: Distribution of glaciers in the Panjnad basin




36
                                                                          6 Indus Basin



Table 6.9: Glacier characteristics in the Panjnad basin

                                         Sub-basin                                                                           Panjnad
Parameter                   Units
                                         Jhelum           Chenab          Ravi             Beas            Sutlej*           basin
Basin area in HKH           km2                 31,811          29,115             9,276          13,970         49,380          133,552
 Latitude                   degrees       33.47-35.11      32.12-34.20     32.19-33.01     31.66-32.41      30.45-33.14      30.45-35.11
 Longitude                  degrees       73.42-75.59      74.79-77.77     76.23-77.06     76.77-77.84      77.61-81.22      73.42-81.22
 Number of glaciers         unit                   733           2,039              217             384              2,108           5,481
 CI glacier area            km2                 213.95        2,064.67             96.63          379.78         855.17         3,610.19
 DC glacier area            km2                    8.82         276.57             16.99           36.82             71.02          410.22
 Total glacier area         km2                 222.77        2,341.23            113.62          416.60       1,315.01         4,409.24
 Largest glacier area       km2                    6.82         109.33              9.23           29.04             49.55          109.33
 Total ice reserves         km3                    8.97         210.70              5.51           31.78             82.89          339.86
 Highest elevation          masl                  6,285           7,103            5,824           6,196             6,652           7,103
 Lowest elevation           masl                  3,404           3,001            3,276           3,079             3,606           3,001
 CI glacier elevation       masl          3,536-6,285      3,001-7,103     3,511-5,824     3,079-6,196      3,606-6,652      3,001-7,103
 DC glacier elevation       masl          3,404-4,368      3,115-5,913     3,276-5,008     3,612-5,274      4,006-5,830      3,115-5,913
 Mean CI glacier slope      degrees                  30              28               27              25               24               27
 Mean DC glacier slope      degrees                  12              11               11              10               12               11
 CI-DC area ratio           unit                  24.26            7.47             5.69           10.31             12.04             8.80
 Average glacier area       km2                    0.30            1.15             0.52            1.08              0.62             0.80
 *extends into China (area in China contains 570 glaciers with an area of 388 km2, all in the Sutlej basin; CI/DC differentiation
 excludes these)




The majority of glaciers were small with an average
glacier area of less than 1 km2 in the Jhelum, Ravi,                             Figure 6.21: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice
and Sutlej sub-basins, and slightly more than 1 km2 in                              reserves in the sub-basins of the Panjnad basin
the Chenab and Beas sub-basins (Figure 6.21). The
overall average glacier area of the Panjnad basin
was only 0.80 km2.

Glacier area classes – The number, area, and
estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size
classes are summarised in Table 6.10 and shown as a
percentage of the total in Figure 6.22. Of the 5,481
glaciers in the basin, 3,995 (73%) were in the smallest
size class 1 (≤0.5 km2), together comprising about
15% of the total glacier area and 4% of the estimated
ice reserves. Class 3 (1.0 to 5.0 km2) had the second
highest number of glaciers and the highest total area
(33% of the total). The large glaciers in class 5
(≥10.0 km2) were fewest in number but contributed
30% of the total area and 53% of the ice reserves.

Glacier elevation – Figure 6.23 shows the elevation
range of CI and DC glacier components in the sub-
basins. The highest glacier elevation was 7,213 masl
and the lowest 3,001 masl, both in the Chenab sub-basin. The small mountain glaciers had only small individual
elevation ranges, whereas the valley glaciers had a large range from crown to terminus. CI type glaciers were
generally found at higher elevations and debris-covered (DC) glacier areas at lower elevations.


                                                                                                                                              37
                   The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



      Table 6.10: Glacier area classes in the Panjnad basin

                                                                                                                                      Mean area
                    Area                     Number                            Area                         Estimated ice reserves
      Area class                                                                                                                      per glacier
                    (km2)
                                             Total           %                 km2           %              km3          %            km2
      1                           ≤ 0.5           3,995             72.9         655.52            14.9        14.708           4.3          0.16
      2                      0.51-1.00                658           12.0         461.77            10.5        16.764           4.9          0.70
      3                      1.01-5.00                697           12.7       1,467.73            33.3        84.541          24.9          2.11
      4                     5.01-10.00                 74             1.4        516.25            11.7        43.295          12.7          6.98
      5                         ≥10.00                 57           1.04       1,307.97            29.7       180.551          53.1         22.95
                                     Total           5,481           100        4,409.24            100       339.859           100          0.80




  Figure 6.22: Percentage of glacier number, area,                                             Figure 6.23: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers
and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier size                                          in the sub-basins of the Panjnad basin
            classes in the Panjnad basin




                                                                                      Excluding glaciers in China



      Figure 6.24: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers                                         Figure 6.25: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers
                   in the Panjnad basin                                                          in the sub-basins of the Panjnad basin




 38
                                                                                      Excluding glaciers in China
                                                                           6 Indus Basin
                                                                                     Figure 6.26: Comparative distribution of different
                                                                                       glacier types in the Panjnad basin by number,
Glacier aspect – Figure 6.24 shows the percentage of
                                                                                              area, and estimated ice reserves
glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. Similar
numbers of glaciers had west (14%), southwest (16%),
south (16%), southeast, (15%) and east (15%) aspects,
and slightly less a northeast aspect (11%). Only a few
had north or northwest aspects.

Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin
ranged from 10° to 60°, with slopes of 20° to 30° most
common in all cardinal directions, followed by slopes of
10° to 20° and 30° to 40°. The very few glaciers with
slopes greater than 60° had south, southwest, and west
aspects (Figure 6.24).

The mean slope of the CI glaciers was 27° and of DC
glaciers 11° with small variations in the different sub-
basins (Figure 6.25).

                                                                               Excluding glaciers in China
Morphological glacier type – The morphological
classification of glaciers in the Panjnad basin is
summarised in Table 6.11; the comparative distribution by number, area, and estimated ice reserves is shown
graphically in Figure 6.26. The 827 glaciers in China were not classified morphologically.

Just over 98% of the glaciers were identified as mountain type: 62% mountain basin type, 30% ice apron type, and
the remaining 6% various other types. Mountain basin glaciers covered 59% of the total glacier area, and contained
41% of the total ice reserves; ice apron type glaciers contributed relatively little to these.

The area and ice reserves of the valley glaciers are generally large as discussed in previous sections. The valley
glaciers in the Panjnad basin have both compound and simple basins. They comprised only 2% of the total by
number, but contributed almost 35% of the total glacier area and 57% of the total estimated ice reserves (Table
6.11, Figure 6.26).

Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – Figure 6.27 shows the area distribution of CI and DC glacier components
in the sub-basins. A total of 410 km2 (10%) of the total analysed glacier area was debris covered (Table 6.9). The
Chenab sub-basin had the maximum DC glacier area (276 km2) and the Ravi sub-basin the highest percentage DC
area.



Table 6.11: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Panjnad basin*

                                                                                                                                Mean area
Glacier type                         Number                     Area                             Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                                per glacier

                                     Total           %          km2              %               km3           %                km2
             Miscellaneous                     20         0.4           5.05               0.1         0.168              0.1          0.25
             Ice apron                       1,388       29.8         206.05               5.3         5.018              1.7          0.15

  Mountain
             Cirque                            84         1.8          13.43               0.3         0.315              0.1          0.16
             Niche                            194         4.2          12.69               0.3         0.172              0.1          0.07
             Basin                           2,868       61.6    2,309.70               59.3       124.524           41.0              0.81
Valley       Trough                           100         2.2    1,349.86               34.6       173.446           57.1             13.50
                             Total           4,654       100     3,896.79                100        303.642           100              0.84
* Excluding glaciers in China




                                                                                                                                              39
                     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region


     Figure 6.27: Percentage distribution by area of CI                                Figure 6.28: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
    and DC glaciers in sub-basins of the Panjnad basin                                      in the sub-basins of the Panjnad basin




Excluding glaciers in China                                                      Excluding glaciers in China




         Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the sub-basins is shown in Figure 6.28. Overall, there were
         glaciated areas of more than 100 km2 at every 100 m level from 4,300 – 5,800 masl. The maximum glaciated
         area overall was 347 km2 at an elevation of 5,200-5,300 masl. The maximum glaciated areas in the individual
         basins were 218 km2 at 5,100-5,200 masl in the Chenab sub-basin; 97 km2 at 5,400-5,500 masl for the Sutlej
         sub-basin; 52 km2 at 5,100-5,200 masl for the Beas sub-basin; 38 km2 at 4,400-4,500 masl for the Jhelum sub-
         basin; and 17 km2 at 4,700-4,800 masl for the Ravi sub-basin.




    40
                                                                   7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin




   7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin


   The Ganges (Ganga) river is one of the major rivers of the Indian subcontinent and revered by Hindus who consider
   it holy. It forms at Devprayag at the confluence of the Bhagirathi and Alaknanda rivers. The Bhagirathi river originates
   from Gaumukh (3,920 masl), the terminus of the Gangotri Glacier in Uttarakhand, India. The Alaknanda river, also
   known as the Vishnu Ganga, originates from the terminus of the Satopanth and Bhagirath Kharak glaciers, which rise
   from the Chaukhamba mountain also in Uttarakhand, India. Many major tributaries feed into the Alaknanda river,
   including the Mandakani, Pindar, Nandakani, Birahi, Dhauliganga, and Saraswati rivers. Further down, the Ganges
   is joined by major tributaries from Nepal: the Karnali, Gandaki (Narayani), and Koshi rivers.

   The glaciated regions of the major Ganges basin are divided into 5 basins and 26 sub-basins (Figure 7.1). The
   largest tributaries of the Ganges are the Yamuna, Upper Ganga, Karnali (Ghagara in India) from western Nepal,



Figure 7.1: The basins and sub-basins of the glaciated part of the Ganges river system showing distribution of glaciers




    Yamuna                Upper Ganga           Karnali               Gandaki*                Koshi*
    1. Tons               3. Bhagirathi         8. Kali               15. Kali Gandaki*       20. Indrawati
    2. Upper Yamuna       4. Bhilanga           9. W. Seti            16. Seti                21. Sun Koshi*
                          5. Mandakini          10. Humla             17. Marsyangdi          22. Tama Koshi*
                          6. Alaknanda          11. Kawari            18. Budhi Gandaki*      23. Likhu
                          7. Pindar             12. Mugu              19. Trishuli*           24. Dudh Koshi
                                                13. Tila                                      25. Arun*
                                                14. Bheri                                     26. Tamor
    *extends into China                                                                       27. Pelkhu is an interior basin   41
                The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     Gandaki (Narayani) from central Nepal, and the Koshi from eastern Nepal. All the Nepali tributaries contain a large
     amount of Himalayan glacier melt. The Padma river (a major distributary of the Ganges) is joined by the Jamuna (or
     Yamuna) and Meghna rivers (largest and second largest distributaries of the Brahmaputra river). Fanning out into a
     350 km wide delta (world’s largest), the Ganges empties into the Bay of Bengal.

     The Ganges has a total basin area of 1,001,019 km2, of which 244,806 km2 lies within the HKH region. The river
     flows for about 2,510 km, generally southeastward, through a vast plain to the Bay of Bengal. The basin extends
     from 27.53° to 31.42° N latitude and 77.98° to 88.70° E longitude, with an elevation ranging from sea level to
     the highest peak in the world (Mt. Everest – 8,850 masl).

     Data

     The mapping and inventory of the glaciated areas in the sub-basins of the Ganges were carried out using ETM+
     images from 2000 to 2008. The topographic characteristics were derived using the SRTM DEM. The list of images
     used is shown in Table 7.1.




     Table 7.1: Landsat images used for the Ganges basin

     Path-Row   Image                                   Date                Used for     Sub-basin
                LE71460392000362SGS00                   12/27/2000          correction
                L71146039_03920051123                   11/23/2005          analysis     Bhilanda, Mandakini, Yamuna, Tons,
     146-39
                LE71460392005343PFS00                   12/9/2005           analysis     Bhagirathi

                LE71460392008320SGS00                   11/15/2008          analysis
                L71146038_03820060923                   9/23/2006           analysis
                LE71460382000282SGS00                   1/8/2000            correction
     146-38     LE71460382006282ASN00                   10/9/2006           analysis     Tons, Bhagirathi, Yamuna
                LE71460382008240SGS00                   8/27/2008           analysis
                LE71460382001252SGS00                   9/9/2001            correction
                LE71450392001293SGS00                   10/20/2001          analysis
                                                                                         Pindar, Alaknanda, Dhauliganga,
     145-39     LE71450392005320SGS00                   11/16/2005          analysis
                                                                                         Goriganga, Ramganga, Mandakini
                LE71450392008313SGS00                   11/8/2008           analysis
     144-39     LE71440392008338SGS00                   10/13/2001          analysis     Kali
                LE71440391999313SGS00                   09/11/1999          correction   Humla, Kawari, Mahakali, West Seti
     144-39     LE71440392005345PFS00                   11/12/2005          correction
                LE71440392008338SGS00                   03/12/2008          analysis
                LE71430392002298SGS01                   25/10/2002          correction   Mugu
     143-39
                LE71430392008347SGS00                   12/12/2008          analysis
                LE71430402005290PFS00                   17/10/2005          analysis
     143-40     LE71430402008347SGS00                   12/12/2008          analysis     Tila
                LE71430402002362SGS00                   28/12/2002          correction
                l5142040_04020060207                    07/02/2006          analysis     Bheri, Kali, Seti, Marsyangdi
     142-40
                l72143040_04020081212                   12/12/2008          analysis
                LT51410402005316BKT00                   12/11/2005          analysis     Trishuli
     141-40
                LT51410402006303BKT00                   30/10/2006          analysis
                LT51410412005316BKT00                   12/11/2005          analysis
     141-41                                                                              Sun, Indrawati
                LT51410412006303BKT00                   30/10/2006          analysis
                LE71400412007355SGS01                   21/12/2007          analysis     Arun, Dudh, Tama, Likhu
     140-41
                LT51400412005309BKT00                   05/11/2005          correction
                LE71390412002350SGS00                   16/12/2002          correction
     139-41                                                                              Tamor
                LE71390412007348PFS00                   14/12/2007          analysis



42
                                                                7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

The Ganges basin contains a total of 7,963 glaciers distributed between 27.53° and 31.42° N latitude and
77.98° and 88.70° E longitude (Figure 7.1). It has a total glaciated area of 9,012 km2 with estimated ice reserves
of about 794 km3. The major glaciated basins from west to east are the Yamuna (Jamuna), Upper Ganga, Karnali
(together with the Kali), Gandaki (Narayani), and Koshi. The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each
main basin are summarised in Table 7.2.

Yamuna basin

The Yamuna river originates from the Yamunotri glacier on the southwestern slopes of the Bandarpunchh peak in the
Garhwal Himalaya and forms the western boundary of Himachal Pradesh. It has two glaciated sub-basins – the
Tons and the Upper Yamuna. The glaciers are concentrated in the northeast corner of the catchment with the Tons
catchment the most glaciated (Figure 7.2). The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are
summarised in Table 7.3.

Number, area, and ice reserves – The Yamuna basin had 185 glaciers (166 in the Tons sub-basin and 19 in the
Upper Yamuna sub-basin) with a total area of 114 km2 and estimated ice reserves of close to 9 km3 (Table 7.3).
The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the sub-basins are shown in Figure 7.3. The Tons river
catchment contains about 110 km2 of glaciers but the estimated ice reserves are only 8.42 km3; the glaciers in the
Upper Yamuna have only a nominal volume of ice reserves, indicating that most of the glaciers are small.

Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
summarised in Table 7.4 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 7.4. There were 147 glaciers in class 1
(≤0.5 km2), 79% of the total number but with only 15% of the total area and 4% of the ice reserves. The two large
glaciers with an area ≥10 km2 covered 37% of the total area and contained 60% of the ice reserves.




                              Figure 7.2: Distribution of glaciers in the Yamuna basin




                                                                                                                        43
44




     Table 7.2: Glacier characteristics in the Ganges basin within the HKH region

     Parameter                        Units                Basin                                                                                                                           Ganges
                                                           Yamuna                Upper Ganga          Karnali*              Gandaki*            Koshi*                Pelkhu**

     Basin area                       km2                              11,370              34,504                 81,711               36,450              71,047                 2,404          244,806***
     Latitude                         degrees                      30.97-31.42        30.19-31.37          28.67-30.58           28.11-29.33          27.53-28.95          28.42-28.74           27.53-31.42
     Longitude                        degrees                      77.98-78.60        78.55-80.23          80.00-83.66           83.25-85.74          85.48-88.70          85.40-85.74           77.98-88.70
     Number of glaciers               unit                                185                1,536                 2,417                1,710                2,073                    42               7,963
     CI glacier area                  km2                               98.58            1,372.49                1,489.12           1,701.05               960.42                    NA             5,621.68
     DC glacier area                  km2                               15.84              254.59                 191.61               128.48              219.42                    NA               809.92
     Total glacier area               km2                              114.42            1,627.08                1,871.98           2,285.18             2,983.61                129.27             9,011.53
                                                                                                                                                                                                                The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




     Largest glacier area             km2                               22.03              176.76                  46.34                59.02                80.72                36.26               176.76
     Total ice reserves               km3                                8.57              162.08                 121.56               194.25              294.53                 12.55               793.53
     Highest elevation                masl                              6,287                7,481                  7678                8,093                8,806                7,228                8,806
     Lowest elevation                 masl                              3,872                3,762                 3,476                3,273                3,719                4,985                3,273
     CI glacier elevation             masl                         4,153-6,287        3,895-7,481          3,610-7,678           3,734-8,093          3,962-8,806          4,985-7,228           3,610-8,806
     DC glacier elevation             masl                         3,872-5,036        3,762-5,929          3,476-5,839           3,273-5,754          3,977-6,009                    NA          3,273-6,009
     Mean CI glacier slope            degrees                              26                   30                    28                   31                   28                    24                   28
     Mean DC glacier slope            degrees                              10                   15                    11                   13                   15                   NA                    13
     CI-DC area ratio                 unit                               6.23                 5.39                   7.77               13.24                 4.38                   NA                  6.94
     Average glacier area             km2                                0.62                 1.06                   0.77                1.34                 1.44                 3.08                  1.13
     *Extends into China (area in China contains 1,841 glaciers with an area of 2,579 km2; CI/DC refers to the remaining 6,122 glaciers with an area of 6,431 km2); ** includes area at the watershed head of
     the Koshi basin; *** includes area of non-glaciated sub-basins
                                                                  7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



  Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was 6,287 masl and the lowest 3,872 masl both in the Tons sub-
  basin (Table 7.3). DC glaciers in the Tons sub-basin were found from 5,036 to 3,872 masl. The elevation range in
  the Upper Yamuna sub-basin was much less (5,670 to 4,564 masl) and it had no DC glaciers.

  Glacier aspect – Figure 7.5 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. The most
  common aspect was southwest (27%) of followed by west (17%) and south (19%). Only 2% had a northern aspect.

  Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers ranged from 10° to 60°, with slopes of 20° to 30° most common in the
  south, southwest, and west facing glaciers (Figure 7.5).


   Table 7.3: Glacier characteristics in the Yamuna basin

   Parameter                     Units              Sub-basin
                                                                                                   Yamuna
                                                    Tons                      Upper Yamuna
   Basin area                    km2                              5,142                    2,331            11,370*
   Latitude                      degrees                     31.02-31.42             30.97-31.03         30.97-31.42
   Longitude                     degrees                     77.98-78.60             78.46-78.57         77.98-78.60
   Number of glaciers            unit                               166                      19                 185
   CI glacier area               km2                              93.98                     4.60              98.58
   DC glacier area               km2                              15.84                       0               15.84
   Total glacier area            km2                             109.82                     4.60             114.42
   Largest glacier area          km2                              22.03                     1.23              22.03
   Total ice reserves            km3                               8.42                     0.15               8.57
   Highest elevation             masl                             6,287                    5,670              6,287
   Lowest elevation              masl                             3,872                    4,564              3,872
   CI glacier elevation          masl                        4,153-6,287             4,564-5,670         4,153-6,287
   DC glacier elevation          masl                        3,872-5,036                      0          3,872-5,036
   Mean CI glacier slope         degrees                             28                      23                  26
   Mean DC glacier slope         degrees                             10                       0                  10
   CI-DC area ratio              unit                              5.93                       0                6.23
   Average glacier area          km2                               0.66                     0.24               0.62
   *Area including not glaciated sub-basins




Figure 7.3: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                   Figure 7.4: Percentage of glacier number, area, and
  reserves in the sub-basins of the Yamuna basin                       estimated ice reserves in the different glacier size
                                                                                  classes in the Yamuna basin




                                                                                                                        45
                  The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     Table 7.4: Glacier area classes in the Yamuna basin

                                                                                                                                Mean area
                  Area                      Number                            Area                     Estimated ice reserves
     Area class                                                                                                                 per glacier
                  (km2)
                                            Total           %                 km2          %           km3           %          km2
     1                          ≤ 0.5               147           79.5          17.46           15.3      0.361           4.2         0.12
     2                     0.51-1.00                 18             9.7         12.82           11.2      0.475           5.5         0.71
     3                     1.01-5.00                 17             9.2         35.00           30.6      2.025          23.6         2.06
     4                    5.01-10.00                  1             0.5             6.95         6.1      0.583           6.8         6.95
     5                        ≥10.00                  2             1.1         42.19           36.9      5.128          59.8      21.10
                                    Total           185            100          114.42          100          8.571        100         0.62


     The mean slope of CI glaciers was 28° in the Tons sub-basin and 23° in the Upper Yamuna sub-basin. The mean
     slope of DC glaciers was 10°.

     Morphological glacier type – The morphological classification of glaciers in the Yamuna basin is summarised in Table
     7.5; the comparative distribution by number, area, and ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure 7.6.

     Close to 97% of the glaciers were identified as mountain type: 54% mountain basin type, 31% ice apron type, and
     the remainder a mix of types. The Tons and upper Yamuna sub-basins contained 92 and 8 mountain basin type
     glaciers, respectively. Mountain type glaciers covered 49% of the glacier area, and contained 27% of the estimated
     ice reserves (Table 7.5).

     The valley glaciers in the region have both compound and simple basins. There were six valley glaciers, all in the
     Tons sub-basin. Although only 3% of the total number, the valley glaciers covered more than 50% of the glacier area
     and contained 73% of the ice reserves (Figure 7.6).

     Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – Overall, 14% of the glaciers in the Yamuna basin were DC type, all within
     the Tons sub-basin, and covering an area of 16 km2. The majority of glaciers in the Upper Yamuna sub-basin were
     smaller CI type glaciers on the mountain slopes.

     Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the two sub-basins is shown in Figure 7.7. The glaciers
     extended from 3,800 to 6,200 masl in the Tons sub-basin and from 4,500 to 5,400 masl in the Upper Yamuna



     Figure 7.5: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers                                         Figure 7.6: Comparative distribution of different
                  in the Yamuna basin                                                       glacier types in the Yamuna basin by number,
                                                                                                   area, and estimated ice reserves




46
                                                                          7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



Table 7.5: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Yamuna basin

                                                                                                                        Mean area
Glacier type                       Number                   Area                             Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                        per glacier
                                   Total         %          km2               %              km3           %            km2
               Miscellaneous                 7        3.8          1.27              1.1           0.034          0.4         0.18
               Ice apron                    57       30.8          6.25              5.5           0.141          1.6         0.11

    Mountain
               Cirque                        9        4.9          1.01              0.9           0.019          0.2         0.11
               Niche                         6        3.2          0.48              0.4           0.008          0.1         0.08
               Basin                       100       54.1         47.60             41.6           2.118        24.7          0.48
Valley         Trough                       6         3.2         57.82             50.5           6.251        72.9          9.64
                           Total           185       100      114.42                 100           8.571         100          0.62


sub-basin. The glacier area in the Tons sub-basin was more than 5 km2 in every 100 m band from 4,600 to 5,600
masl. The maximum glaciated areas were 11 km2 at 5,100 masl in the Tons sub-basin, and a little more than 1 km2
at an elevation of 4,800 to 4,900 in the Upper Yamuna sub-basin.

Upper Ganga basin

The Upper Ganga basin is drained by the Alaknanda river. There are five glaciated sub-basins, the Alaknanda itself,
together with the Bhagirath, Bhilanga, Mandakani, and Pindar (Figure 7.8). The distribution and characteristics of
the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 7.6.

Number, area, and ice reserves – The Upper Ganga basin has a total area of 34,504 km2, with 1,536 glaciers
covering 1,627 km2, and estimated ice reserves of 162 km3. The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of
glaciers in the sub-basins are shown in Figure 7.9. The two major sub-basins Alaknanda and Bhagirathi together
contain 1300 glaciers, more than 75% of the total, covering 1430 km2, 88% of the total glacier area. The Upper
Ganga basin is characterised by many small glaciers, but as a result of the presence of a few large glaciers, the
average area of the glaciers in the basin is more than 1 km2. The estimated ice reserves in the Alaknanda and
Bhagirathi sub-basins are almost equal, a total together of 148 km3 or more than 90% of the reserves in the basin.

Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
summarised in Table 7.7 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 7.10. The great majority of the glaciers,
1138 or 74% of the total, were in class 1 (≤0.5 km2), but together contributed only about 10% of the glacier area
and just over 2% of the ice reserves. A further 22%
of the glaciers were in class 2 or 3, covering 31%
of the glaciated area and containing 17% of the ice
reserves. The 27 glaciers in class 5, 2% of the total,               Figure 7.7: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
covered nearly 44% of the area and contained close                        in the sub-basins of the Yamuna basin
to 70% of the basin’s ice reserves.

Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was
7,481 masl and the lowest 3,762 masl, both in the
Alaknanda sub-basin (Table 7.6 and Figure 7.11).
The termini of the glaciers in the Bhagirathi sub-basin
were all above 4,000 masl, whereas in the other sub-
basins they lay a little below this.

Glacier aspect – Figure 7.12 shows the percentage of
glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. More
than 20% of the glaciers had a southwest aspect,
more than 15% southeast and south aspects, and just
under 15% west and east aspects. Only about 2%
faced north.
                                                                                                                                      47
                  The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



                                       Figure 7.8: Distribution of glaciers in the Upper Ganga basin




     Table 7.6: Glacier characteristics in the Upper Ganga basin

     Parameter                  Units       Sub-basin                                                                               Upper
                                            Bhagirathi         Bhilanga            Mandakini        Alaknanda      Pindar           Ganga

     Basin area                 km2                  5,832               1,463           1,645            6,416             1,897       34,504*
     Latitude                   degrees      30.73-31.37         30.73-30.88        30.59-30.80      30.25-31.06    30.19-30.30      30.19-31.37
     Longitude                  degrees      78.55-79.41         78.83-79.03        78.98-79.35      79.23-80.23    79.76-80.08      78.55-80.23
     Number of glaciers         unit                    510                   46               77           790              113            1,536
     CI glacier area            km2                 510.98               77.52           35.80           679.16             69.03      1,372.49
     DC glacier area            km2                  93.42                2.08            4.74           146.85               7.5        254.59
     Total glacier area         km2                 604.40               79.60           40.54           826.01             76.53      1,627.08
     Largest glacier area       km2                 176.76               29.67            5.85            43.05             11.15        176.76
     Total ice reserves         km3                  73.79                7.48            2.13            73.78              4.90        162.08
     Highest elevation          masl                 6,904               6,572           6,725            7,481             6,683           7,481
     Lowest elevation           masl                 4,084               3,934           3,828            3,762             3,814           3,762
     CI glacier elevation       masl         4,087-6,904         4,151-6,572        3,895-6,725      4,086-7,481    3,973-6,683      3,895-7,481
     DC glacier elevation       masl         4,084-5,929         3,934-4,876        3,828-4,892      3,762-5,825    3,814-5,389      3,762-5,929
     Mean CI glacier slope      degrees                  28                   27               32            29               33              30
     Mean DC glacier slope      degrees                  11                   13               18            11               21              15
     CI-DC area ratio           unit                   5.47              37.23            7.55             4.62              9.20            5.39
     Average glacier area       km2                    1.19               1.73            0.53             1.05              0.68            1.06
     *Includs area of not glaciated sub-basins



48
                                                                       7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



    Table 7.7: Glacier area classes in the Upper Ganga basin

                                                                                                                         Mean area
    Area      Area               Number                     Area                          Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                         per glacier
    class     (km2)
                                 Total           %          km2            %              km3             %              km2
    1                  ≤ 0.5             1,138       74.1         167.20          10.3            3.715            2.3          0.15
    2            0.51-1.00                153        10.0         105.74           6.5            3.876            2.4          0.69
    3            1.01-5.00                184        12.0         399.46          24.6           23.591       14.6              2.17
    4           5.01-10.00                 34         2.2         230.88          14.2           19.383       12.0              6.79
    5                 ≥10.00               27         1.8         723.81          44.5          111.513       68.8             26.81
                         Total           1,536       100     1,627.08              100          162.077        100              1.06




 Figure 7.9: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                        Figure 7.10: Percentage of glacier number, area,
reserves in the sub-basins of the Upper Ganga basin                             and estimated ice reserves in the different
                                                                              glacier size classes in the Upper Ganga basin




    Figure 7.11: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers                               Figure 7.12: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
    in the sub-basins of the Upper Ganga basin                                           in the Upper Ganga basin




                                                                                                                                       49
                          The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



          Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to 60°, with slopes of 20° to 30° and 30° to
          40° most common for all aspects (Figure 7.12). Less than 1% of glaciers of all aspects had steep slopes of 50° to
          60°. A very few glaciers with a southwest aspect had slopes of more than 60°.

          The mean slope of DC glaciers in the different sub-basins ranged from 11° to 21°; and that of CI glaciers from 27°
          to 33° (Table 7.6 and Figure 7.13). The mean slopes of both CI and DC glaciers were higher in the Pindar and
          Mandakini sub-basins than in the other sub-basins.

          Morphological glacier type – The morphological classification of glaciers in the upper Ganga basin is summarised in
          Table 7.8; the comparative distribution by number, area, and estimated ice reserves is shown graphically in
          Figure 7.14.

          Close to 96% of the glaciers were identified as mountain type, the majority of them ice apron type, followed closely
          by basin type. Mountain glaciers contributed 49% of the glacier area, and 28% of estimated ice reserves.

          The valley glaciers in the region have both compound basins and simple basins. The 65 valley glaciers, 4% of the
          total number, contributed more than 50% of glacier area and 71% of ice reserves.



          Table 7.8: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Upper Ganga basin

                                                                                                                                        Mean area
          Glacier type                              Number                            Area                     Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                                        per glacier
                                                    Total           %                 km2          %           km3          %           km2
                             Miscellaneous                   29             1.9         11.08            0.7      0.448           0.3         0.38
                             Ice apron                      746           48.6         101.48            6.2      2.597           1.6         0.14

               Mountain
                             Cirque                           3             0.2             0.73        0.04      0.022          0.01         0.24
                             Niche                           32             2.1             3.54         0.2      0.086          0.05         0.11
                             Basin                          661           43.0         689.70           42.4     43.187          26.7         1.04
          Valley             Trough                          65             4.2        820.55           50.4     115.74          71.4      12.62
                                            Total       1,536              100        1,627.08          100     162.077           100         1.06




Figure 7.13: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers in the sub-                                           Figure 7.14: Comparative distribution of different
            basins of the upper Ganga basin                                                        glacier types in the Upper Ganga basin by number,
                                                                                                             area, and estimated ice reserves




     50
                                                                    7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



    Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – The DC glaciated area was 254 km2, close to 17% of the total, almost all
    (239 km2) in the highly glaciated Bhagirathi and Alaknanda sub-basins (Table 7.6). The actual proportion of DC
    glaciers in the different sub-basins was similar, with the exception of the Bhilganga sub-basin which had a very small
    proportion of DC glaciers (Figure 7.15).

    Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the sub-basins is shown in Figure 7.16. The maximum
    glaciated areas were 67.8 km2 at 5,500-5,600 masl in the Alaknanda sub-basin and 51.3 km2 at 5,300-5,400
    masl in the Bhagirathi sub-basin. The Alaknanda sub-basin had glacier areas of more than 50 km2 in all hundred
    metre elevation bands between 5,100 and 5,800 masl, and areas of 20 to 50 km2 in all bands from 4,600 to
    5,100 masl and 5,800 to 6,000 masl. The glacier area below 3,900 masl and above 6,900 masl was less than
    1 km2 (Figure 7.16).

    Karnali (Ghaghara) basin

    The Karnali river originates in the Tibetan Plateau near Lake Mansarovar. The catchment lies between longitudes
    80.00° and 83.66° E and latitudes 28.67° and 30.58° N (Figure 7.17). The Karnali is joined by the Kali
    (Mahakali in Nepal), West Seti, Humla, Kawari, Tila, Mugu Karnali, and Bheri rivers. The major part of the Mugu
    Karnali flows from east to west, and of the Humla Karnali from west to east, unlike most rivers on the southern flanks
    of the Himalayas, which generally flow from north to south. The Karnali river is called the Ghaghara in India, and
    is one of the major tributaries of the Ganges. The glaciers are mostly found in the northern part of the basin (Figure
    7.17). The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 7.9.

    Number, area, and ice reserves – The Karnali basin extends across three countries, Nepal, India, and China and
    is the largest river basin in Nepal (Table 7.9). A total of 2417 glaciers were identified in the basin with an area of
    1,872 km2 and estimated ice reserves of 122 km3. The Kali sub-basin had the most glaciers (758) and the Kawari
    sub-basin the least (48).

    The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the sub-basins are shown in Figure 7.18. The Kali, Bheri,
    and Humla sub-basins had the greatest number of glaciers and proportion of the glaciated area, and contributed
    most to the estimated ice reserves (34%, 28%, and 23% of the total, respectively). The largest glacier was the
    compound basin type glacier of GLIMS ID G080065E30534N with an area of about 46 km2 located in the Kali
    sub-basin, and extending from 6,780 to 4,234 masl.




Figure 7.15: Percentage distribution by area of CI and                    Figure 7.16: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
DC glaciers in the sub-basins of the Upper Ganga basin                       in the sub-basins of the Upper Ganga basin




                                                                                                                             51
              The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



                            Figure 7.17: Distribution of glaciers in the Karnali (Ghaghara) basin




Figure 7.18: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                      Figure 7.19: Percentage of glacier number, area,
   reserves in the sub-basins of the Karnali basin                        and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
                                                                                   size classes in the Karnali basin




 52
     Table 7.9: Glacier characteristics in the Karnali (Ghaghara) basin

                                                      Sub-basin
     Parameter                   Units                                                                                                                                                             Karnali
                                                      Kali                West Seti           Humla*              Kawari               Tila                Mugu                Bheri
     Basin area                  km2                         17,325                7,372               8,989                  822               3,327               5,374              13,686             81,711**
     Latitude                    degrees                29.83-30.58         29.66-30.05         29.68-30.50          29.68-29.94         29.19-29.48         29.11-29.95         28.67-29.42            28.67-30.58
     Longitude                   degrees                80.00-81.11         81.00-81.56         80.64-82.48          81.51-81.73         82.34-82.58         82.24-83.51         82.40-83.66            80.00-83.66
     Number of glaciers          unit                             758                 268                672                   48                  66                 205                 400                2,417
     CI glacier area             km2                         465.15              138.26               326.18               30.18                37.34             108.05               383.96             1,489.12
     DC glacier area             km2                           95.32               22.59               35.54                 3.19                1.87               19.73               13.37               191.61
     Total glacier area          km2                         560.47              160.86               552.95               33.37                39.21             127.78               397.33             1,871.98
     Largest glacier area        km2                           46.34               14.25               14.14                 8.56                8.08                8.57               24.79                46.34
     Total ice reserves          km3                           41.23                  8.47             33.72                 1.78                2.05                6.40               27.91               121.56
     Highest elevation           masl                          6,850               6,982               7,678               6,795                6,408               6,837               7,515                7,678
     Lowest elevation            masl                          3,476               4,064               4,249               3,631                4,043               4,473               4,096                3,476
     CI glacier elevation        masl                   3,610-6,850         4,393-6,982         4,315-7,678          3,877-6,795         4,407-6,408         4,650-6,837         4,440-7,515            3,610-7,678
     DC glacier elevation        masl                   3,476-5,406         4,064-5,839         4,249-5,721          3,631-4,013         4,043-4,455         4,473-5,659         4,096-5,499            3,476-5,839
     Mean CI glacier slope       degrees                          30                   30                  24                  25                  31                  28                   30                  28    7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin

     Mean DC glacier slope       degrees                          10                   15                  14                   7                    8                 13                   11                  11
     CI-DC area ratio            unit                           4.88                  6.12              9.18                 9.46               19.99                5.48               28.71                 7.77
     Average glacier area        km2                            0.74                  0.60              0.82                 0.70                0.59                0.62                0.99                 0.77
     *extends into China (area in China contains 198 glaciers with an area of 191 km2, all in the Humla sub-basin; CI/DC differentiation excludes these); **includes area of not glaciated sub-basins




53
                         The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



            Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
            summarised in Table 7.10 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 7.19. The small class 1 glaciers
            (≤0.5 km2) were the most numerous (1,686, about 70% in the basin) but contributed only 15% of the glacier area
            and 5% of the ice reserves. The large glaciers in class 5 had an average area of 17 km2 and contributed about
            17% of the glacier area and 31% of the ice reserves.

            Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was 7,678 masl, in the Humla sub-basin, and the lowest 3,476
            masl, in the Kali sub-basin (Figure 7.20). CI glaciers were found from 7,678 to 3,610 masl and DC glaciers from
            5,839 to 3,476 masl .

            Glacier aspect – Figure 7.21 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. Similar
            numbers of glaciers (16 to 18%) had west, southwest, south, southeast, and east aspects. Only 1% had a northern
            aspect.

            Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to 60°. The majority of glaciers with all aspects
            had slopes of 20° to 40°, with the two classes 20° to 30° and 30° to 40° almost equally represented. Less than 1%
            of glaciers had mean slopes of 50° to 60°, and all with north, northwest or west aspects.

            The average slope of the CI glaciers in the sub-basins ranged from 24° to 31°, and of DC glaciers from 7° to 15°
            with slight basin to basin variations (Figure 7.22).

            Table 7.10: Glacier area classes in the Karnali basin

                                                                                                                                          Mean area
                          Area              Number                             Area                        Estimated ice reserves
            Area class                                                                                                                    per glacier
                          (km2)
                                            Total             %                km2              %          km3            %               km2
            1                     ≤ 0.5             1,686            69.8             288.95        15.4          6.721             5.5          0.17
            2                 0.51-1.00              321             13.3             228.54        12.2          8.474             7.0          0.71
            3                 1.01-5.00              343             14.2             701.60        37.8         40.339        33.2              2.05
            4             5.01-10.00                  48               2.0            331.67        17.7         27.954        23.0              6.91
            5                   ≥10.00                19               0.8            321.21        17.2         38.073        31.3             16.91
                                   Total            2,417             100            1,871.97       100      121.560            100              0.77




         Figure 7.20: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers                                                 Figure 7.21: Aspect and mean slope of
            in the sub-basins of the Karnali basin                                                         glaciers in the Karnali basin




Excluding glaciers in China
       54
                                                                                    7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



        Morphological glacier type – The morphological classification of glaciers in the Karnali basin is summarised in Table
        7.11; the comparative distribution by number, area, and ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure 7.23. The part
        of the Humla sub-basin in China has a total of 198 glaciers. These glaciers were not classified morphologically, and
        are not included here.

        More than 98% of the glaciers were identified as mountain type, the majority basin type (66%), followed by apron
        type (23%). Mountain type glaciers covered 81% of the glaciated area and contained 69% of the total ice reserves
        (Table 7.11). The 41 valley glaciers comprised less than 2% of the total by number, but with an average area of
        7.86 km2, contributed 19% of the total glacier area and 31% of the total estimated ice reserves

        Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – In total, 126 of the 2,219 glaciers classified had a debris-covered
        component, covering about 12% of the total glacier area. Figure 7.24 shows the area distribution of CI and DC
        glaciers in the sub-basins. The Bheri and Tila sub-basins had the lowest proportion of DC glaciers and the Kali
        and Mugu the highest. Overall the CI to DC ratio in the Karnali basin was close to 8:1 (Table 7.9), which is
        comparatively higher than in the other basins of the HKH region.

        Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the sub-basins is shown in Figure 7.25. The maximum
        glaciated area in the basin overall was 172 km2 at 5,300-5,400 masl; glaciated areas of greater than 10 km2
        within a 100 m band were found at all elevations from 4,200 to 6,600 masl. The maximum glaciated areas in the
        sub-basins were 59.4 km2 at 5,400-5,500 in the Humla sub-basin; 47 km2 at 5,200-5,300 in the Kali sub-basin,

         Table 7.11: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Karnali basin (exclusing glaciers in China)

                                                                                                                                  Mean area
         Glacier type                      Number                     Area                             Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                                  per glacier
                                           Total           %          km2               %              km3             %          km2
                       Miscellaneous                 28         1.3          6.05              0.4            0.202         0.2         0.22
                       Ice apron                    508        22.9         85.76              5.1            2.615         2.4         0.17

            Mountain
                       Cirque                         4         0.2          1.65              0.1            0.054         0.1         0.41
                       Niche                        176         7.9         16.00              1.0            0.273         0.3         0.09
                       Basin                   1,462           65.9   1,248.90                74.3           71.938        66.2         0.85
         Valley        Trough                        41         1.9     322.38                19.2           33.658        31.0         7.86
                                   Total           2,219       100     1,680.73                100           108.740       100          0.76




        Figure 7.22: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers                                    Figure 7.23: Comparative distribution of different
            in the sub-basins of the Karnali basin                                         glacier types in the Karnali basin by number,
                                                                                                 area, and estimated ice reserves




Excluding glaciers in China                                                     Excluding glaciers in China                                     55
                      The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



 Figure 7.24: Percentage distribution by area of CI and DC                              Figure 7.25: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
       glaciers in the sub-basins of the Karnali basin                                        in the sub-basins of the Karnali basin




Excluding glaciers in China                                                       Excluding glaciers in China




          41.4 km2 at 5,500-5,600 masl in the Bheri sub-basin, 20 km2 at 5,000-5,100 in the West Seti sub-basin,
          14.6 km2 at 5,400-5,500 in the Mugu sub-basin, 4.9 km2 at 5,300-5,400 in the Kawari sub-basin, and 4.5 km2
          at 5,100-5,200 in the Tila sub-basin.

          Gandaki basin

          The Gandaki river is also known as the Sapta Gandaki and in the lower reaches as the Narayani. The Gandaki
          basin lies in central Nepal between the Karnali and Koshi basins between longitudes 83.25° and 85.74° E and
          latitudes 28.11° and 29.33° N, with a catchment area extending into China (Figure 7.26). The river has seven
          major tributaries, but only five have catchment areas with glaciers: the Trishuli (the main tributary), Budhi Gandaki,
          Marsyangdi, Seti, and Kali Gandaki (Figure 7.26). The Budhi Gandaki and Marsyangdi rivers flow from north-
          central Nepal, and the Seti and Kali Gandaki rivers from western Nepal. The Gandaki has an immense annual
          discharge, which flows towards the southwest into the Ganges in India. The distribution and characteristics of the
          glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 7.12.

          Number, area, and ice reserves – The Gandaki basin had a total of 1,710 glaciers with an area of 2,285 km2 and
          estimated ice reserves of 194 km3 (Table 7.12). The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the
          sub-basins are shown in Figure 7.27. The Kali Gandaki sub-basin had the most glaciers (507) and the Seti sub-
          basin the least (45), while the Trishuli sub-basin had the highest glacier area coverage (639 km2) and estimated ice
          reserves (59 km3). The largest glacier was the compound basin type glacier with GLIMS ID G085711E28293N
          (Gtrgr10_106), which had an area of 59 km2 extending from 7,168 to 4,467 masl. The Seti is the smallest basin
          in the Gandaki but had the second largest glacier, GLIMS ID G084129E28507N (Gsegr10_30) with an area of
          46 km2.

          Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
          summarised in Table 7.13 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 7.28. The majority of glaciers were in
          the smallest class (1,043, or 61%); and the least in class 4 (36 or 2%). The class 1 glaciers contributed only 9% of
          the glacier area and 2% of the ice reserves. The 46 glaciers in class 5 (more than 10 km2) were only 3% of the total
          number, but had the greatest total area (42% of the total) and contained 62% of the ice reserves.




     56
                                                                        7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



Table 7.12: Glacier characteristics in the sub-basins of the Gandaki basin

Parameter                 Units         Sub-basin                                                                            Gandaki
                                        Kali             Seti           Marsyangdi       Budhi            Trishuli*
                                        Gandaki*                                         Gandaki*
Basin area                km2                 10,411            2,950           4,791             4,986           5,756        36,450**
Latitude                  degrees        28.49-29.33     28.47-28.58     28.34-28.89     28.27-28.90      28.11-28.99        28.11-29.33
Longitude                 degrees        83.25-84.22     83.95-84.21     83.79-84.71     84.48-85.19      84.99-85.74        83.25-85.74
Number of glaciers        unit                    507              45             385              357                416         1,710
CI glacier area           km2                 547.81            67.15         517.03             349.82         219.24          1,701.05
DC glacier area           km2                  15.34             4.95           28.35             37.58           42.25          128.48
Total glacier area        km2                 569.53            72.10         545.38             459.28         638.89          2,285.18
Largest glacier area      km2                   33.25           45.54           30.21             35.20           59.02           59.02
Total ice reserves        km3                   43.47            8.35           44.01             37.60           60.83          194.25
Highest elevation         masl                  8,093           7,515           7,878             8,019           7,381           8,093
Lowest elevation          masl                  3,861           3,754           3,651             3,273           3,692           3,273
CI glacier elevation      masl           4,149-8,093     4,425-7,515     4,034-7,878     3,734-8,019      3,797-7,381        3,734-8,093
DC glacier elevation      masl           3,861-5,475     3,754-5,262     3,651-5,605     3,273-5,754      3,692-5,522        3,273-5,754
Mean CI glacier slope     degrees                   29             30              30               32                 34              31
Mean DC glacier slope     degrees                   19             10              10               13                 13              13
CI-DC area ratio          unit                  35.70           13.58           18.24              9.31               5.19        13.24
Average glacier area      km2                    1.12            1.60            1.42              1.29               1.54          1.34
*extends into China (area in China contains 371 glaciers with an area of 455 km2, CI/DC differentiation excludes these);
**includes area of not glaciated sub-basins




                                    Figure 7.26: Distribution of glaciers in the Gandaki basin




                                                                                                                                            57
                     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



        Table 7.13: Glacier area classes in the Gandaki basin

        Area class                                                                                                                 Mean area
                     Area               Number                             Area                         Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                                   per glacier
                     (km2)
                                        Total             %                km2            %             km3           %            km2
        1                     ≤0.5           1,043               61.0            203.21           8.9         4.908          2.5          0.19
        2              0.51-1.00                 256             15.0            178.97           7.8         6.592          3.4          0.70
        3              1.01-5.00                 329             19.2            697.99          30.5      40.539          20.9           2.12
        4             5.01-10.00                  36              2.1            253.27          11.1      21.617          11.1           7.04
        5                   ≥10.00                46              2.7            951.74          41.7     120.594          62.1          20.69
                                Total           1,710             100        2,285.18             100     194.249           100           1.34




   Figure 7.27: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                                       Figure 7.28: Percentage of glacier number, area,
      reserves in the sub-basins of the Gandaki basin                                            and estimated ice reserves in the different
                                                                                                  glacier size classes in the Gandaki basin




        Figure 7.29: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers                                          Figure 7.30: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
           in the sub-basins of the Gandaki basin                                                          in the Gandaki basin




     58 glaciers in China
Excluding
                                                                                    7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



         Table 7.14: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Gandaki basin (excluding glaciers in China)

                                                                                                                                      Mean area
         Glacier type                     Number                     Area                              Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                                      per glacier
                                          Total           %          km2               %               km3             %              km2
                      Miscellaneous                  3         0.2           1.37              0.1            0.048        0.03              0.46
                      Ice apron                    412        30.8         161.88              8.9            6.838             4.4          0.39

           Mountain
                      Cirque                         8         0.6           1.86              0.1            0.049        0.03              0.23
                      Niche                        102         7.6          14.87              0.8            0.372             0.2          0.15
                      Basin                        786        58.7    1,086.77                59.4           76.986        49.4              1.38
         Valley       Trough                        28         2.1      562.78                30.8           71.688        46.0             20.10
                                  Total           1,339       100     1,829.52                 100           155.981        100              1.37


        Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was 8,093 masl in the Kali Gandaki sub-basin and the lowest
        3,273 masl in the Budhi Gandaki sub-basin. CI glaciers were found from 8,093 to 3,734 masl and DC glaciers
        from 5,754 to 3,273 masl (Figure 7.29) (glaciers in China were not analysed).

        Glacier aspect – Figure 7.30 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. The glaciers in
        the Gandaki basin are distributed in all cardinal directions. Approximately 20% of the glaciers faced southwest and
        19% south. Around 15% had a southeast, east, or west aspect. Only 1% had a north aspect.

        Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers ranged from 10° to more than 60°, with slopes of 20° to 40° most common,
        but slopes of 20° to 30° slightly more common in glaciers with a southwest, south, southeast, or east aspect, and
        slopes of 30° to 40° more common in glaciers with a west or more northerly aspect. A very few glaciers had slopes
        of less than 10° or more than 50°.

        Figure 7.31 shows the mean slope of CI and DC glaciers in the different basins. As elsewhere, the mean slope of
        CI glaciers was considerably higher than those of DC glaciers in all sub-basins except the Kali Gandaki, where the
        difference was less marked.

        Morphological glacier type – The morphological classification of glaciers in the Gandaki basin is summarised in
        Table 7.14; the comparative distribution by number, area, and ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure 7.32. The
        371 glaciers in China were not classified morphologically, and are not included here.



        Figure 7.31: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers                                    Figure 7.32: Comparative distribution of different
            in the sub-basins of the Gandaki basin                                         glacier types in the Gandaki basin by number,
                                                                                                  area, and estimated ice reserves




Excluding glaciers in China                                                     Excluding glaciers in China                                         59
                        The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region


Figure 7.33: Percentage distribution by area of CI and DC                                 Figure 7.34: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
       glaciers in sub-basins of the Gandaki basin.                                            in the sub-basins of the Gandaki basin




Excluding glaciers in China                                                         Excluding glaciers in China




                                             Figure 7.35: Distribution of glaciers in the Koshi basin




       60
                                                                7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



Close to 98% of the glaciers were mountain type, the majority of them mountain basin type (59%) or ice apron type
(31%). Mountain glaciers covered an area of 1,266 km2, 69% of the basin total, and had estimated ice reserves of
84 km3, 54% of the basin total. The 28 valley glaciers represented only 2% of the total number, but with an average
area of 20 km2, they covered 31% of the glaciated area and contained 46% of the ice reserves.

Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – This section refers to the 1339 glaciers in Nepal. The DC glacier
components covered a total area of 128 km2 out of the 1,830 km2 glacier area investigated. Figure 7.33 shows
the area distribution in the sub-basins; the proportional area of DC glaciers was very low in all sub-basins, with the
smallest proportion in the Kali Gandaki.

Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the sub-basins is shown in Figure 7.34. The maximum
glaciated area in the basin overall was 171 km2 at 5,700-5,800 masl; with glaciated areas found from 3,200
to 8,100 masl. The maximum glaciated areas in the sub-basins were 69.50 km2 at 5,800-5,900 masl for the Kali
Gandaki sub-basin, 59.54 km2 at 5,400-5,500 masl for the Trishuli sub-basin, 43.35 km2 at 5,600-5,700 masl
for the Marsyangdi sub-basin, 33.16 km2 at 5,500-5,600 masl for the Budhi Gandaki sub-basin, and 5.98 km2 at
6,400-6,500 masl for the Seti sub-basin.

Koshi basin

The Koshi river basin lies in eastern Nepal and neighbouring areas of China from longitude 85.48° to 88.70° E
and latitude 27.53° to 28.95° N (Figure 7.35). It has seven major sub-basins: the Tama Koshi, Arun, Dudh Koshi,
Likhu, Tama, Sun Koshi, and Indrawati. The Arun, Tama, and Sun Koshi rivers originate in Tibet AR, China, and flow
south through the Himalayas to Nepal; the other rivers originate within Nepal. The Indrawati merges with the Sun
Koshi which flows to the southeast, is then joined by the Tama Koshi, Likhu, and Dudh Koshi from the north, and after
confluence with the Arun and Tamor rivers becomes the Sapta (seven) Koshi river and flows towards the southwest as
a tributary of the Ganges in India.

The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 7.15. The glaciers in
China were not classified morphologically or differentiated into CI and DC glaciers; information related to these is
limited to the glaciers within the part of the basin in Nepal.

Number, area, and ice reserves – The Koshi basin had 2,073 glaciers, of which 1,230 glaciers were in China in
the sub-basins of the upper catchments of the Sun Koshi, Tama Koshi, and Arun rivers. The total glaciated area was
2,984 km2 with estimated ice reserves of 295 km3 (Table 7.15).

The Arun sub-basin is the largest sub-basin with the most glaciers (964), highest glacier area coverage (1,429 km2),
and greatest ice reserves (141 km3). The Tamor, Dudh Koshi, Tama Koshi, and Sun Koshi sub-basins also had
significant numbers and areas of glaciers (Figure 7.36).

The largest single glacier was the Ngojumba glacier in the Dudh Koshi sub-basin with an area of 81 km2.

Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
summarised in Table 7.16 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 7.37. Nearly 64% of the glaciers were
in small class 1, but they contributed only 8% of the glacier area and 2% of the estimated ice reserves. The 49
large glaciers of class 5 were only 2% of the total number, but they contributed about 47% of the glacier area and
contained almost 70% of the ice reserves in the basin.

Glacier elevation – The glaciated area extended from just below the peak of Mt. Everest (8,850 masl) to 3,719 masl
(Table 7.15), both points in the Arun sub-basin. CI glaciers were found from 8,806 to 3,962 masl and DC glaciers
from 6,009 to 3,977 masl (Figure 7.38).

Glacier aspect – Figure 7.39 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. Around 19%
of the glaciers had a southwest aspect, and approximately 16-17% a west, south, southeast, or east aspect. Less
than 1% had a north aspect.

                                                                                                                         61
62




     Table 7.15: Glacier characteristics in the Koshi basins

     Parameter                  Unit          Sub-basin                                                                                                                                       Koshi
                                              Indrawati            Sun Koshi*           Tama Koshi*          Likhu                Dudh Koshi           Arun*                 Tamor
     Basin area                 km2                       1,229               3,365                4,127                1,050                4,062               30,125               6,052           71,047**
     Latitude                   degrees           28.10-28.16          27.95-28.46          27.77-28.29          27.71-27.82          27.64-28.10          27.65-28.95          27.53-27.92      27.53-28.95
     Longitude                  degrees           85.48-85.70          85.70-86.28          86.07-86.56          86.42-86.55          86.52- 87.00         85.73-88.70          87.62-88.18      85.48-88.70
     Number of glaciers         unit                         37                 204                  294                    26                 287                  964                261               2,073
     CI glacier area            km2                       17.91               52.86                80.18                20.13               304.42               151.55              333.40             960.44
     DC glacier area            km2                           0                 4.80               13.57                 4.17               110.68                12.26               73.93             219.42
     Total glacier area         km2                       17.91              284.00               405.64                24.30               415.09             1,429.33              407.33           2,983.60
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




     Largest glacier area       km2                        4.43               40.62                43.75                 9.32                80.72                75.72               77.10              80.72
     Total ice reserves         km3                        0.79               25.11                38.32                  1.53               41.62               141.49               45.66             294.53
     Highest elevation          masl                      5,911               7,974                7,335                6,698                8,222                8,806               8,437              8,806
     Lowest elevation           masl                      4,694               3,962                4,328                4,334                4,344                3,719               4,176              3,719
     CI glacier elevation       masl               4,694-5,911         3,962-7,974          4,328-7,335          4,590-6,698          4,588-8,222          4,443-8,806          4,588-8,437      3,962-8,806
     DC glacier elevation       masl                          0         3,977-5,134         4,555-5,593          4,334-5,463          4,344-5,996          4,182-5,840          4,176-6,009      3,977-6,009
     Mean CI glacier slope      degrees                      24                   33                   29                   24                   31                     29              27                 28
     Mean DC glacier slope      degrees                       0                   15                   14                   21                   14                     12              16                 15
     CI-DC area ratio           unit                          0               11.01                  5.91                 4.83                 2.75               12.36                4.51               4.38
     Average glacier area       km2                        0.48                 1.39                 1.38                 0.93                 1.45                1.48                1.56               1.44
     *Extends into China (area in China contains 1,230 glaciers with an area of 1,803 km2, including almost all of those in the Arun sub-basin; CI/DC excludes these)
     **includes area of not glaciated sub-basins
                                                                                    7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



           Table 7.16: Glacier area classes in the Koshi basin

                                                                                                                                    Mean area
                         Area               Number                       Area                          Estimated ice reserves
           Area class                                                                                                               per glacier
                         (km2)
                                            Total           %            km2            %              km3             %            km2
           1                      ≤ 0.5             1,320       63.68          243.98         8.18             5.826        1.98           0.18
           2                  0.51-1.00              303        14.62          214.87         7.20             7.963        2.70           0.71
           3                  1.01-5.00              355        17.12          769.33        25.78            45.280       15.37           2.17
           4              5.01-10.00                  46         2.22          340.69        11.42            29.446       10.00           7.41
           5                    ≥10.00                49         2.36     1,414.75           47.42           206.013       69.95          28.87
                                    Total           2,073       100.00    2,983.61          100.00           294.528       100.00          1.44




    Figure 7.36: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                                      Figure 7.37: Percentage of glacier number,
        reserves in the sub-basins of the Koshi basin                                       area, and estimated ice reserves in the different
                                                                                                 glacier size classes in the Koshi basin




  Figure 7.38: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers in the sub-                                  Figure 7.39: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
                 basins of the Koshi basin                                                                in the Koshi basin




Excluding glaciers in China
                                                                                                                                                  63
                          The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



          Slope – The mean slope of almost all the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to 50°, with slopes of 20° to 30°
          slightly more common than slopes of 30° to 40° in all aspect directions. Less than 1% of glaciers had slopes above
          50°, all with a northwest aspect (Figure 7.39).

          The mean slope of CI glaciers in the different basins ranged from 24° to 33°, and the mean slope of DC glaciers
          from 12° to 21° (Figure 7.40). The mean slope of DC glaciers was much less than that of CI glaciers in all basins
          except the Likhu.

          Morphological glacier type – The morphological classification of glaciers in the Koshi basin is summarised in Table
          7.17; the comparative distribution by number, area, and ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure 7.41. The part
          of the Koshi basin in China had a total of 1230 glaciers. These glaciers were not classified morphologically, and
          are not included here. This section refers to the 843 glaciers within Nepal.

          Almost 95% of the glaciers were identified as mountain type, mainly mountain basin (49%) and apron type (30%)
          with a fairly large number of niche type (12%). The mountain basin glaciers covered 31% of the glaciated area and
          contained 15% of the estimated ice reserves (Table 7.17). The 45 valley type glaciers were only 5% of the total
          number, but contributed 60% of the glacier area and 81% of the estimated ice reserves (Figure 7.41).


          Table 7.17: Morphological classification of glaciers in Koshi basin (excluding glaciers in China)

                                                                                                                                           Mean area
                                             Number                             Area                        Estimated ice reserves
          Glacier type                                                                                                                     per glacier
                                             Total             %                km2              %          km3           %                km2
                        Miscellaneous                  17               2.0             17.38         1.5         0.932              0.8          1.02
                        Ice Apron                     255              30.3             79.85         6.8         3.024              2.5          0.31

             Mountain
                        Cirque                         12               1.4              1.45         0.1         0.026         0.02              0.12
                        Niche                         100              11.9             14.17         1.2         0.322              0.3          0.14
                        Basin                         414              49.1            360.32        30.5      18.306           15.2              0.87
          Valley        Trough                         45               5.3            706.68        59.9      97.537           81.2             15.70
                                     Total            843               100           1,179.85        100      120.147           100              1.40




          Figure 7.40: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers                                          Figure 7.41: Comparative distribution of different
               in the sub-basins of the Koshi basin                                              glacier types in the Koshi basin by number, area,
                                                                                                             and estimated ice reserves




Excluding glaciers in China

     64
                                                                          7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



   Figure 7.42: Percentage distribution by area of CI and                      Figure 7.43: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
           DC glaciers in sub-basins of the Koshi                                     in the sub-basins of the Koshi basin




Excluding glaciers in China                                              Excluding glaciers in China




       Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – This section refers only to the 843 glaciers within Nepal. The total DC
       glacier area was 220 km2 (19% of the total), 110 km2 of which was in the Dudh Koshi sub-basin (Table 7.15).
       Figure 7.42 shows the area distribution in the sub-basins. The Likhu, Dudh Koshi, and Tamor sub-basins all had a
       reasonable proportion of DC glaciers; the Indrawati sub-basin had no DC glaciers.

       Hypsography – The greatest concentration of glaciers overall in the Koshi basin was 217.24 km2 at an elevation
       5,800-5,900 masl. Amounts of more than 50 km2 within a 100 m band were found from 4,900 to 6,500 masl. The
       glacier area-altitude distribution in the seven sub-basins is shown in Figure 7.43. The maximum glaciated areas were
       130.90 km2 at 6,000-6,100 masl in the Arun sub-basin;
       49.60 km2 at 5,500-5,600 masl in the Tama sub-basin;                   Table 7.18: Glacier characteristics in the
       39.15 km2 at 5,700-5,800 masl in the Tamor sub-basin;                  Pelkhu basin
       38.91 km2 at 5,500-5,600 masl in the Dudh Koshi sub-                   Parameter             Unit
       basin; 21.75 km2 at 5,700-5,800 masl in the Sun Koshi                  Basin Area            km2                    2,405
       sub-basin; 3.81 km2 at 5,300-5,400 masl in the Likhu                   Latitude              degrees          28.42-28.74
       sub-basin; and 3.63 km2 at 5,200-5,300 masl in the                     Longitude             degrees          85.40-85.74
       Indrawati sub-basin. The glaciers of the Arun sub-basin
                                                                              Number of glaciers    unit                      42
       are characterised by high altitude accumulation areas and
                                                                              CI glacier area       km2                  129.27
       far-reaching tongues and had the greatest extension over
                                                                              DC glacier area       km2                        0
       different elevations (3,700-8,700 masl). The Indrawati sub-
                                                                              Total glacier area    km2                  129.27
       basin had the shortest elevation band (4,694-5,911 masl).
                                                                              Largest glacier area     km2                36.26
                                                                              Total ice reserves       km3                12.55
       Pelkhu basin
                                                                              Highest elevation        masl               7,228
       The Pelkhu is a small interior basin at the head of the Arun           Lowest elevation         masl               4,985
       sub-basin in China extending from 28.42° to 28.74° N                   CI glacier elevation     masl         4,985-7,228
       latitude and 85.40° to 85.74° E longitude. The sub-basin               DC glacier elevation     masl                   0
       is elongated and has high concentrations of glaciers in the            Mean CI glacier slope    degrees              24º
       southern part of the upper catchment and some glaciers at
                                                                              Mean DC glacier slope    degrees                0
       the centre of the sub-basin (Figure 7.44). The distribution and
                                                                              CI-DC area ratio         unit                   0
       characteristics of the glaciers in the basin are summarised in
                                                                              Average glacier area     km2                 3.08
       Table 7.18.

                                                                                                                                   65
                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region


                                        Figure 7.44: Distribution of glaciers in the Pelkhu basin




     Number, area, and ice reserves – Altogether 42
     glaciers were identified in the basin, covering a
     total area of 129.27 km2, and containing estimated
     ice reserves of 12.55 km3. The largest glacier was                       Figure 7.45: Percentage of glacier number, area,
     GLIMS ID G085694E28430N (Gpegr10_31)                                     and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
     located at 28.43° N latitude and 85.69° E                                         size classes in the Pelkhu basin
     longitude, which had an area of 36.26 km2, and
     extended from 7,109 to 5,283 masl.

     Glacier area classes – The number, area, and
     estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size
     classes are summarised in Table 7.19 and shown
     as a percentage of the total in Figure 7.45. The
     majority of glaciers (38%) were in class 1, whereas
     nearly half the area and 66% of the ice reserves were
     contributed by the three glaciers in Class 5, which
     had a mean glacier area of 21.49 km2.

     Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was
     7,228 and the lowest 4,985 masl. The elevation
     range for individual glaciers ranged from 1,890



66
                                                                   7 Ganges (Ganga) Basin



    Figure 7.46: Aspect and mean slope                                          Figure 7.47: Area-altitude distribution
       of glaciers in the Pelkhu basin                                              of glaciers in the Pelkhu basin




Table 7.19: Glacier area classes in the Pelkhu basin

Area                                                                                                             Mean area
class    Area                Number                  Area                             Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                 per glacier
         (km2)
                             Total        %          km2              %               km3            %           km2
1                 ≤ 0.5              16       38.1          2.48              1.9           0.056          0.5          0.15
2           0.51 - 1.00               8       19.1          6.62              5.1           0.259          2.1          0.83
3           1.01 - 5.00              11       26.2         30.32             23.5           1.891        15.1           2.76
4          5.01 - 10.00               4        9.5         25.40             19.7           2.086        16.6           6.35
5                ≥10.00               3        7.1         64.46             49.9           8.256        65.8          21.49
                     Total           42       100      129.27                 100           12.548        100           3.08




to 32 m. The greatest elevation range (7,064-5,174 masl) was for glacier GLIMS ID G085520E28579N
(Gpegr10_20).

Glacier aspect – Figure 7.46 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. The
predominant aspect (37%) was southeast, followed by east (24%) and northeast (17%). Only 2% of glaciers had a
northwest or north aspect.

Slope – The average mean slope of the glaciers was 24°. The mean glacier slope ranged from 10 to 60° with
slopes from 20 to 30° the most common in all aspect classes, followed by 30° to 40°. A very few south-facing
glaciers had slopes of more than 50°.

Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the basin is shown in Figure 7.47. The maximum glaciated
area was 14.16 km2 at 5,700-5,800 masl. Amounts of more than 5 km2 in every 100 m band was found from
5,300 to 6,400 masl.




                                                                                                                               67
                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




     8 Brahmaputra Basin


     The Brahmaputra River is one of the major rivers of Central and South Asia. It originates in the Mansarovar lake
     and passes through the Tibet Autonomous Region of China, the Indian states of Arunachal Pradesh and Assam, and
     Bangladesh. The river has many names: Jamuna in Bengali, Dihang in Assamese, Tsangpo (‘Purifier’) in Tibetan, and
     Yarlung Zangbo Jiang in Chinese (Pinyin). The source of the river is the Chemayungdung Glacier in southwestern
     Tibet. The river runs for nearly 1,100 km from its source in a generally easterly direction between the main range of
     the Himalayas to the south and the Kailash range to the north; at Namcha Barwa it enters India and bends to take
     a westerly path through Arunachal Pradesh and Assam, where it is joined by several tributaries such as the Subansiri
     and Kameng from Arunachal; Manas, Punatsang, and Amo from Bhutan; and the Tista from Sikkim, travelling a
     further 1800 km to its confluence with the Ganges River (Figure 8.1).




       Figure 8.1: The Brahmaputra river system showing major basins and sub basins and distribution of glaciers




     Tista                   Amo*         Punatsang        Manas*            Kameng       Subansiri*       Dihang        Yarlung Zangbo*
     1. East Rathong         5.Amo*       6. Wang          9. Mangde         13. Kameng   14. Subansiri*   15. Dibhang   17. Maquan
     2. Talung                            7. Mo            10. Chamkhar                                    16. Lohit     18. Yarlung Zangbo
     3. Zemu                              8. Pho           11. Kuri*                                                     19. Dogxung Zangbo
     4. Changme Khangpu                                    12. Dangme*                                                   20. Xiangqu
                                                                                                                         21. Nianchu
                                                                                                                         22. Langkamu
                                                                                                                         23. Lhasa
                                                                                                                         24. Nyang
     *extends into China                                                                                                 25. Yigongzongbo
68
                                                                 8 Brahmaputra Basin



The Brahmaputra has a total catchment area of 528,079 km2 of which 432,480 km2 lies within the HKH region
(Figure 8.1). Across the Tibetan Plateau, the river has a relatively low flow and receives little silt, but in India, it
passes through a region of heavy rainfall and carries a large amount of rainfall runoff with considerable sediment
loads. It has a braided channel throughout most of its length in Assam, with a few large islands within the channel.
Shifting of river channels is common. During the monsoon, regular flooding occurs in Assam and Bangladesh causing
significant damage and human casualties.

Data

The mapping and inventory of the glaciated areas in the sub-basins of the Brahmaputra was carried out using ETM+
images from 2005 to 2008. The topographic characteristics were derived using the SRTM DEM. The list of images
used is shown in Table 8.1.

Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

The Brahmaputra basin had 11,497 glaciers with a total glaciated area of 14,020 km2 and estimated ice
reserves of about 1,303 km3, distributed between 27.49°–31.03° N latitude and 82.03°–97.76° E longitude at
elevations of 2,435-8,331 masl (Figure 8.1). The glaciers are concentrated in the northeastern part of the basin; the
largest covered an area of 204 km2.

The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 8.2. Descriptions of
the typology, morphological classification, and hypsography of the part of the basin in China, the greater part of the
glaciated area, are not yet available and not included in the description here. Only 1,444 glaciers have detailed
information on CI/DC type and morphological classification.

Table 8.1: Landsat images used for the Brahmaputra basin (for areas outside China)

Path-Row          Image                               Date               Used for         Basin/ Sub-basin
                  LE71390412007348PFS00               12/14/2007         analysis
                                                                                          East Rathong, Talung, Zemu,
139-41
                                                                                          Changme Khangpu
                  L71139041_04120051208               12/8/2005          analysis

138-41            LE71380412007357SGS01               23/12/2007         analysis         Pa , Thim, Mo, and Pho Chu

                                                                                          Kameng, Mangde, Chamkhar,
137-41            LE71370412006027EDC00               27/01/2006         analysis
                                                                                          Kuri, Dangme Chu

                  L71136041_04120050101               1/1/2005           correction

                  LE71360412006212PFS00               7/31/2006          analysis
136-41                                                                                    Kameng, Dangme, Subansiri
                  LE71360412007279EDC00               10/6/2007          analysis

                  LE71360412008314SGS00               11/9/2008          analysis

                  LE71360402008314SGS00               11/9/2008          analysis

                  LE71360402007279EDC00               10/6/2007          analysis
136-40                                                                                    Subansiri
                  LE71360402006212PFS00               7/31/2006          analysis

                  L5136040_04020051024                10/24/2005         analysis

                  LE71350402008339EDC00               12/4/2008          analysis

135-40            LE71350402008323EDC00               11/18/2008         analysis         Dibhang

                  LE71350402008307SGS00               11/2/2008          analysis

                  LE71340402009270SGS00               9/27/2009          analysis

                  LE71340402007265PFS00               9/22/2007          analysis
134-40                                                                                    Dibhang, Lohit
                  L5135040_04020061223                12/23/2006         analysis

                  L5134040_04020051111                11/11/2005         correction



                                                                                                                           69
70




     Table 8.2: Glacier characteristics in the Brahmaputra basin within the HKH region

                                                  Basin
     Parameter                    Units                                                                                                                                      Yarlung           Brahmaputra
                                                  Tista            Amo*               Punatsang        Manas*            Kameng           Subansiri*        Dihang*
                                                                                                                                                                             Zangbo*
     Basin area                   km2                      8,665            3,773           14,365            28,574           10,347            26,343           34,412          256,779            432,480**
     Latitude                     degrees          27.50-28.06       27.49-27.91       27.60-28.24      27.70-28.60       27.71-27.98      27.80-28.79       28.20-29.54      27.82-31.03          27.49-31.03
     Longitude                    degrees          88.07-88.88       88.79-89.26       89.24-90.35      90.26-92.45       92.41-92.77      91.89-93.50       95.77-97.76      82.03-97.09          82.03-97.76
     Number of glaciers           unit                      398                32               433            1,090                21              493               955            8,075               11,497
     CI glacier area              km2                     399.02               NA           351.93            278.35             10.63            51.53             94.18               NA             1,185.65
     DC glacier area              km2                      53.88               NA            62.33             31.31               NA                NA                NA               NA               147.52
     Total glacier area           km2                     452.96            40.06           414.26          1,156.93             10.63           486.23         1,305.10        10,153.67            14,019.84
     Largest glacier area         km2                      77.24            19.49            34.73             68.16              2.30            53.33             96.22           204.36               204.36
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




     Total ice reserves           km3                      40.50             3.45            30.18             84.98              0.44            35.94           110.97            996.17             1,302.63
     Highest elevation            masl                     8,331            5,975            7,084             7,223             6,205            6,514             5,902            6,536                8,331
     Lowest elevation             masl                     3,882            4,712            4,080             4,388             4,465            4,223             2,435            3,348                2,435
     CI glacier elevation        masl                                                                                          4,465 -
                                                   4,102-8,331      4,712 - 5,975      4,442-7,084      4,391-7,223                        4,223-6,514       3,707-5,693                NA         3,707-8,331
                                                                                                                                6,205
     DC glacier elevation        masl              3,882-5,828                 NA      4,085-5,368      4,524-5,548                NA                NA                NA               NA         3,882-5,828
     Mean CI glacier slope       degrees                     28                30                 26              20                21                 25              25               NA                     25
     Mean DC glacier slope       degrees                      9                NA                 13              17               NA                NA                NA               NA                     13
     CI-DC area ratio            unit                       7.41               NA              5.65             8.89               NA                NA                NA               NA                 8.04
     Average glacier area        km2                        1.14             1.25              0.96             1.06              0.51             0.99               1.37             1.26                1.22
     * extends into China (area in China contains 10,028 glaciers with an area of 12,686 km2; CI/DC differentiation refers to the remaining 1469 glaciers with an area of 1,333 km2); **includes area of not
     glaciated sub-basins
                                                                8 Brahmaputra Basin



Tista basin

The Tista River has its origin in the Chombu glacial lake of Tista Khangse glacier just above the Lachen Monastery
(>5,800 m) in Sikkim, India. The river initially flows northwest and then towards the south, finding its way down
through deep, narrow meandering gorges. The Tista is joined by the Rangit river, which originates in the Rathong
glacier, at the border between Sikkim and West Bengal. It is then joined by many tributaries before flowing into the
Brahmaputra in Bangladesh. The glaciated area of the Tista river lies within four sub-basins: East Rathong, Talung,
Changme Khangpu, and Zemu (Figure 8.2). The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are
summarised in Table 8.3.

Number, area, and ice reserves – The Tista basin had 398 glaciers all in the northern part (193 in the Zemu sub-
basin, and less than 100 glaciers each in the other sub-basins), with a total area of 453 km2 and estimated ice
reserves of 41 km3 (Table 8.3). The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the sub-basins are
shown in Figure 8.3. The Zemu sub-basin had the most glaciers, greatest glacier area, and greatest estimated ice
reserves; and East Rathong sub-basin the least. The largest glacier in the Tista basin is the Zemu Glacier with an area
of 77 km2. The average area per glacier overall was 1.1 km2, a little more in the Zemu and Talung sub-basins and
less in the East Rathong and Changme Khangpu sub-basins.

Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
summarised in Table 8.4 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 8.4. The great majority of the glaciers,
252 or 66% of the total, were in the smallest class 1 (≤0.5 km2), but together contributed only 11% of the glacier
area and just over 3% of the ice reserves. A further 30% of the glaciers were in class 2 or 3, covering 32% of the
glaciated area and containing 20% of the ice reserves. The 8 glaciers in class 5, 2% of the total, covered nearly
40% of the glaciated area and contained 64% of the basin’s ice reserves. Four of these large glaciers were in the
Zemu sub-basin, three in the Talung sub-basin, and one in the Changme-Khangpu sub-basin.




                              Figure 8.2: Distribution of glaciers in the Tista basin




                                                                                                                          71
                   The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was 8,331 masl and the lowest 3,882 masl, both in the Talung
     sub-basin (Table 8.3 and Figure 8.5). The Changme-Khangpu sub-basin had the smallest range of glacier elevation,
     reflecting the absence of valley glaciers.

     As elsewhere in the HKH the CI glaciers were found at higher elevations than the DC glaciers.

     Glacier aspect – Figure 8.6 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. The majority
     faced southeast (24%), east (22%), southwest (19%) or south (16%). Only about 5% had a more northerly aspect.

     Table 8.3: Glacier characteristics in the Tista basin

                                  Units           Sub-basin
     Parameter                                                                                            Changme         Tista
                                                  East Rathong          Talung            Zemu
                                                                                                          Khangpu
     Basin area                   km2                       2,132                 819             1,969             770           8,665*
     Latitude                     degrees           27.50-27.61           27.53-27.73      27.69-28.06      27.72-27.98     27.50-28.06
     Longitude                    degrees           88.07-88.30           88.13-88.50      88.14-88.82      88.65-88.88     88.07-88.88
     Number of glaciers           unit                          49                 64              193              92              398
     CI glacier area              km2                       29.93                84.46           207.70          76.93            399.02
     DC glacier area              km2                         3.72               13.79            31.98            4.40            53.88
     Total glacier area           km2                       33.70                98.25           239.69          81.32            452.96
     Largest glacier area         km2                         6.65               26.70            77.24          20.29             77.24
     Total ice reserves           km3                         1.91                8.55            24.52            5.53            40.51
     Highest elevation            masl                      7,258                8,331            8,139          6,708             8,331
     Lowest elevation             masl                      4,335                3,882            4,266          4,455             3,882
     CI glacier elevation         masl              4,639-7,258           4,102-8,331      4,337-8,139      4,693-6,708     4,102-8,331
     DC glacier elevation         masl              4,335-5,203           3,882-5,210      4,266-5,828      4,455-5,400     3,882-5,828
     Mean CI glacier slope        degrees                       31                 32               25              22               28
     Mean DC glacier slope        degrees                         8                12                7              10                9
     CI-DC area ratio             unit                        8.05                6.13             6.49          17.50              7.41
     Average glacier area         km2                         0.69                1.54             1.24            0.88             1.14
     *Includesw area of not glaciated sub-basins



Figure 8.3: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                                       Figure 8.4: Percentage of glacier number, area,
    reserves in the sub-basins of the Tista basin                                        and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
                                                                                                   size classes in the Tista basin




72
                                                                    8 Brahmaputra Basin



Table 8.4: Glacier area classes in the Tista basin

                                                                                                                    Mean area
                                  Glacier                   Area                          Estimated ice reserves
Area class   Area (km2)                                                                                             per glacier

                                  Number         %          km2           %               km3           %           km2
1                      ≤ 0.5           262           65.8         51.10          11.3           1.236         3.1          0.20
2                  0.51-1.00                63       15.8         44.65           9.9           1.654         4.1          0.71
3                  1.01-5.00                56       14.1         98.84          21.8           6.367        15.7          1.76
4                 5.01-10.00                 9        2.3         76.70          16.9           5.320        13.1          8.52
5                    ≥10.00                  8        2.0     181.62             40.1        25.921          64.0         22.70
                          Total         398          100      452.91              100        40.497           100          1.14



Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to 60°. Slopes of 20° to 30° were most
common followed by 30° to 40° (Figure 8.6).

The average slope of the CI glaciers in the sub-basins ranged from 22° to 32°, and of DC glaciers from 7° to 12°
with slight basin to basin variations (Figure 8.7).

Morphological glacier type – The morphological classification of glaciers in the Tista basin is summarised in Table
8.5; the comparative distribution by number, area, and estimated ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure 8.8.
More than 94% of glaciers were mountain type, with basin type (45%), and apron type (41%) almost equally
represented. The mountain basin type glaciers covered 35% of the glaciated area and contained 20% of the
estimated ice reserves. The 22 valley glaciers comprised less than 6% of the total by number, but with an average
area of 11.15 km2, contributed 54% of the total glacier area and 75% of the total ice reserves.

Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – In total, 20 of the 398 glaciers had a debris-covered component, covering
about 14% of the total glacier area. Figure 8.9 shows the area distribution of CI and DC glaciers in the sub-basins.
The proportional area occupied by DC glaciers was similar in all the sub-basins at around 10-15%, except the
Changme Khangpu sub-basin where they occupied only 5%.

Hypsography – The area-altitude distribution in the sub-basins is shown in Figure 8.10. The maximum glaciated area
in the basin overall was 39.35 km2 at 5,400-5,500 masl; overall the highest concentration of glaciers was between



  Figure 8.5: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers                                   Figure 8.6: Aspect and mean slope of
      in the sub-basins of the Tista basin                                            glaciers in the Tista basin




                                                                                                                                  73
                      The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



       Table 8.5: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Tista basin

                                                                                                                                       Mean area
       Glacier type                            Number                             Area                       Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                                       per glacier
                                               Total            %                 km2           %            km3           %           km2
                     Miscellaneous                      10              2.5              4.03          0.9         0.147         0.4          0.40
                     Ice apron                         163             41.0             44.15          9.8         1.555         3.8          0.27

          Mountain
                     Cirque                               6             1.5              1.54          0.3         0.041         0.1          0.26
                     Niche                              17              4.3              1.75          0.4         0.031         0.1          0.10
                     Basin                             180             45.2         156.17            34.5         8.100        20.0          0.87
       Valley        Trough                             22              5.5         245.28            54.2      30.623          75.6         11.15
                                       Total           398              100             452.9         100       40.497           100          1.14




       Figure 8.7: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers                                             Figure 8.8: Comparative distribution of different
            in the sub-basins of the Tista basin                                                glacier types in the Tista basin by number, area,
                                                                                                           and estimated ice reserves




Figure 8.9: Percentage distribution by area of CI and DC                                        Figure 8.10: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
       glaciers in the sub-basins of the Tista basin                                                   in the sub-basins of the Tista basin




  74
                                                                8 Brahmaputra Basin



5,000 and 6,000 masl. The maximum glaciated areas in the sub-basins were 25.93 km2 at 5,700 to 5,800 masl
in the Zemu sub-basin; 12.88 km2 at 5,300 to 5,400 masl in the Changme Khampu sub-basin; 9.21 km2 at 5,100
to 5,200 masl in the Talung sub-basin; and 3.72 km2 at 5,300 to 5,400 masl in the East Rathong sub-basin.

Amo basin

The Amo Chu river and its three main tributaries, the Tangka Chu, the Khangphu Chu, and the Tromo Chu, originate
in Tibet AR and flow south (Figure 8.11). The main branch of the Tromo Chu originates west of Phari Dzong, flows
south to the Bhutan-Tibet border at Trakarpo, and along the border until it joins the Amo Chu at Yatung. The Amo
Chu flows eastwards into Bhutan and southeast for about 170 km until it enters the Indian flood plains of West
Bengal near Phuntsholing (a Bhutanese border town). The Amo Chu drains a catchment area of around 16,000 km2
in Tibet AR, which contains all the glaciated areas (Figure 8.11). The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers
in the basin are summarised in Table 8.6. As they all lie in China, they were not differentiated into CI/DC glaciers
or classified morphologically.

Number, area, and ice reserves – A total of 32 glaciers were identified in the Amo basin with an area of 40 km2
and estimated ice reserves of 3.5 km3 (Table 8.6). The largest single glacier had an area of just under 20 km2.

Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
summarised in Table 8.7 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 8.12.




                               Figure 8.11: Distribution of glaciers in the Amo basin




                                                                                                                          75
                  The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



Figure 8.12: Percentage of glacier number, area,                                                 Figure 8.13: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier                                                             in the Amo basin
          size classes in the Amo basin




     The great majority of the glaciers, 23 or 72% of
                                                                                    Table 8.6: Glacier characteristics in the Amo basin
     the total, were in the small class 1 (≤0.5 km2), but
     together contributed only about 9% of the glacier                              Parameter                  Units
     area and less than 2% of the ice reserves. A further                           Basin area                 km2                               3,773
     16% of the glaciers were in class 2, covering 7%                               Latitude                   degrees                    27.49-27.91
     of the glaciated area and also containing 2% of the                            Longitude                  degrees                    88.79-89.26
     ice reserves. The single large class 5 glacier, 3% of                          Number of glaciers         unit                                32
     the total, covered nearly half the glaciated area and                          Total glacier area         km2                               40.06
     contained close to 70% of the basin’s ice reserves.                            Largest glacier area       km2                               19.49
                                                                                    Total ice reserves         km3                                3.45
     Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was
                                                                                    Highest elevation          masl                              5,975
     5,975 masl (GLIMS ID G089256E27818N or
                                                                                    Lowest elevation           masl                              4,712
     Aamgr10_18) and the lowest 4,712 masl (GLIMS ID
                                                                                    Mean glacier slope         degrees                             30
     G088852E27699N or Aamgr10_23).
                                                                                    Average glacier area       km2                                1.25




     Table 8.7: Glacier area classes in the Amo basin

     Area class                                                                                                                            Mean area
                   Area                     Number                            Area                              Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                                           per glacier
                   (km2)
                                            Total           %                 km2               %               km3            %           km2
     1                           ≤ 0.5               23            71.9              3.63                9.1           0.064        1.9           0.16
     2                      0.51-1.00                 5            15.6              2.76                6.9           0.072        2.1           0.55
     3                      1.01-5.00                 1              3.1             2.42                6.0           0.119        3.4           2.42
     4                     5.01-10.00                 2              6.3            11.76              29.4            0.850       24.6           5.88
     5                        ≥10.00                  1              3.1            19.49              48.7            2.349       68.0          19.49
                                    Total            32             100             40.06                100           3.454        100           1.25



76
                                                                            8 Brahmaputra Basin



Aspects – Figure 8.13 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. The majority of
glaciers (more than 45%) had a northeast aspect. Around 12% each faced north or northwest. Very few had a south
trending aspect.

Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to more than 60°, with slopes of 20° to 30°
and 30° to 40° the most common. The average slope of all glaciers was 30°.

Punatsang basin

The Punatsang Chu is formed from the Mo Chu and Pho Chu rivers in Bhutan and is later joined by the Wang Chu
river in India, where it is called the Sankosh river (Figure 8.14), finally merging with the Brahmaputra in Assam. This is
the most important glaciated basin in Bhutan, extending from 89.24° to 90.35° E longitude and 27.60° to 28.24°
N latitude. The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 8.8.

Number, area, and ice reserves – The Punatsang basin has a total area of 14,365 km2, with 433 glaciers covering
an area of about 414 km2 and containing estimated ice reserves of 30 km3 (Table 8.8). The number, area, and
estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the sub-basins are shown in Figure 8.15. The two major glaciated basins of Pho
Chu and Mo Chu have catchment areas of 2,335 km2 and 2,364 km2, with 213 and 163 glaciers, respectively,
covering areas of 257 and 123 km2, and containing estimated ice reserves of 21 and 7 km3.


 Table 8.8: Glacier characteristics in the Punatsang basin

 Parameter                    Units                  Sub-basin                                                           Punatsang
                                                     Wang                   Mo                    Pho
 Basin area                   km2                                 4,602                 2,367                   2,337             14,365*
 Latitude                     degrees                    27.60-27.84              27.73-28.24           27.82-28.17            27.60-28.24
 Longitude                    degrees                    89.24-89.57              89.35-89.91           89.86-90.35            89.24-90.35
 Number of glaciers           unit                                  57                    163                    213                   433
 CI glacier area              km2                                 29.03                113.25               209.65                 351.93
 DC glacier area              km2                                  4.96                  9.57                   47.80                 62.33
 Total glacier area           km2                                 33.99                122.81               257.45                 414.26
 Largest glacier area         km2                                  7.01                 10.35                   34.73                 34.73
 Total ice reserves           km3                                  1.86                  7.06                   21.26                 30.18
 Highest elevation            masl                                7,062                 6,574                   7,084                 7,084
 Lowest elevation             masl                                4,354                 4,092                   4,080                 4,080
 CI glacier elevation         masl                       4,537-7,062              4,447-6,574           4,442-7,084            4,442-7,084
 DC glacier elevation         masl                       4,354-5,034              4,091-5,324           4,080-5,368            4,080-5,368
 Mean CI glacier slope        degrees                               27                     26                     23                    26
 Mean DC glacier slope        degrees                               12                     15                     13                    13
 CI-DC area ratio             unit                                 5.85                 11.84                    4.39                  5.65
 Average glacier area         km2                                  0.60                  0.75                    1.21                  0.96
 *Includes area of not glaciated sub-basins



 Table 8.9: Glacier area classes in the Punatsang basin

 Area class Area                       Number                      Area                           Estimate ice reserves         Mean area
            (km2)                                                                                                               per glacier
                                       Total         %             km2             %              km3            %              km2
 1                           ≤ 0.5             271       62.6             47.45          11.5           1.095            3.6           0.18
 2                       0.51-1.00              80       18.5             55.50          13.4           2.041            6.8           0.69
 3                       1.01-5.00              68       15.7         143.02             34.5           8.263           27.4           2.10
 4                      5.01-10.00               8          1.9           54.51          13.2           4.723           15.7           6.81
 5                         ≥10.00                6          1.4       113.76             27.5        14.056             46.6          18.96
                               Total           433          100       414.25              100        30.178             100            0.96



                                                                                                                                              77
              The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



                                   Figure 8.14: Distribution of glaciers in the Punatsang basin




Figure 8.15: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                      Figure 8.16: Percentage of glacier number, area,
  reserves in the sub-basins of the Punatsang basin                       and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
                                                                                 size classes in the Punatsang basin




 78
                                                                8 Brahmaputra Basin


 Figure 8.17: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers                         Figure 8.18: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
   in the sub-basins of the Punatsang basin                                       in the Punatsang basin




Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
summarised in Table 8.9 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 8.16. The average glacier area was
about 0.96 km2. The majority of the glaciers, 271 or 63% of the total, were in the smallest class 1 (≤0.5 km2), but
together contributed only about 11% of the glacier area and just under 4% of the ice reserves. The 6 glaciers in
class 5, less than 2% of the total, covered 27% of the glaciated area and contained 47% of the basin’s ice reserves.
Unusually, the 68 glaciers in class 3, 16% of the total, contributed the most to the area, 35% of the total, and
contained the second highest amount of ice reserves (27%).

Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was 7,084 masl and the lowest 4,080 masl, both in the Pho
sub-basin (Table 8.8 and Figure 8.17). As elsewhere, the DC glaciers lay at lower elevations overall then the CI
glaciers.

Glacier aspect – Figure 8.18 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. Between 18
and 20% of glaciers had a south, southwest, or west aspect, and around 15% a southeast or east aspect. Only one
glacier had a north aspect.



Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to 60°, with slopes of 20° to 30° the most
common for all aspects (45% of all glaciers) followed by slopes of 30° to 40° (28% of glaciers). Less than 1% of
glaciers had steep slopes 50° to 60°, all with southern aspects. The mean slope of DC glaciers was 13°; and that
of CI glaciers 26° (Table 8.8 and Figure 8.19).

The average slopes of the valley glaciers ranged from 13° to 15° which is favourable to the formation of glacial
lakes, especially at lower elevations; the valley glaciers of the Mo and Pho sub-basins give rise to many glacial
lakes.

Morphological glacier type – The morphological classification of glaciers in the Punatsang basin is summarised in
Table 8.10; the comparative distribution by number, area, and estimated ice reserves is shown graphically in
Figure 8.20.



                                                                                                                       79
                         The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



         Table 8.10: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Punatsang basin

         Glacier type                        Number                            Area                          Estimated ice reserves         Mean area
                                                                                                                                            per glacier
                                             Total            %                km2            %              km3            %               km2
                     Miscellaneous                      1              0.2             0.43            0.1         0.013         0.04             0.43
                     Ice apron                       163              37.6            44.87          10.8          1.611              5.3         0.28

          Mountain
                     Cirque                             0              0.0             0.00            0.0         0.000              0.0         0.00
                     Niche                            14               3.2             0.75            0.2         0.009         0.03             0.05
                     Basin                           236              54.5           189.28          45.7          9.252         30.7             0.80
         Valley      Trough                           19               4.4           178.92          43.2       19.294           63.9             9.42
                                     Total           433               100           414.25           100          30.178         100             0.96




     Figure 8.19: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers                                                Figure 8.20: Comparative distribution of different
        in the sub-basins of the Punatsang basin                                                   glacier types in the Punatsang basin by number,
                                                                                                            area, and estimated ice reserves




Figure 8.21: Percentage distribution by area of CI and DC                                         Figure 8.22: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
    glaciers in the sub-basins of the Punatsang basin                                                 in the sub-basins of the Punatsang basin




    80
                                                                        8 Brahmaputra Basin



Table 8.11: Glacier characteristics in the Manas basin

Parameter                 Units         Sub-basin (Chu)                                                              Manas
                                        Mangde             Chamkhar           Kuri*                Dangme*
Basin area                km2                    3,818              3,167               9,636            10,488           28,574**
Latitude                  degrees          27.82-28.06        27.77-28.06        27.85-28.60        27.70-28.37        27.70-28.60
Longitude                 degrees          90.26-90.57        90.49-90.81        90.32-91.48        91.37-92.45        90.26-92.45
Number of glaciers        unit                     137                 109                518                326              1,090
CI glacier area           km2                    94.02              65.78               64.67              53.89             278.35
DC glacier area           km2                    16.47                9.67                3.72               1.45             31.31
Total glacier area        km2                   110.49              75.44              691.38            279.62            1,156.93
Largest glacier area      km2                    20.67              16.85               68.16              15.46              68.16
Total ice reserves        km3                      7.65               5.16              56.46              15.71              84.98
Highest elevation         masl                   7,223              6,279               6,816              6,380              7,223
Lowest elevation          masl                   4,678              4,617               4,404              4,388              4,388
CI glacier elevation      masl             4,791-7,223        4,617-6,279        4,553-6,816        4,391-6,380        4,391-7,223
DC glacier elevation      masl             4,678-5,548        4,699-5,242        4,524-5,139        5,051-5,448        4,524-5,548
Mean CI glacier slope     degrees                    19                 20                    23              20                  20
Mean DC glacier slope     degrees                    11                 11                    14              31                  17
CI-DC area ratio          unit                     5.71               6.80              17.38              37.17               8.89
Average glacier area      km2                      0.81               0.69                1.33               0.86              1.06
* extends into China (area in China contains 694 glaciers with a total of 847 km2; CI/DC applies only to the remaining 396 glaciers
with an area of 309 km2); **includes area of not glaciated sub-basins


More than 95% of the glaciers were identified as mountain type, the majority of them basin type, followed by ice
apron type. Mountain glaciers contributed 57% of the glacier area, and 36% of estimated ice reserves. The average
valley glacier area was 9.42 km2, compared to between 0.05 to 0.80 km2 for the different mountain types. The 19
valley glaciers contributed 43% of the glaciated area and contained 64% of the ice reserves.

Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – CI glaciers covered an area of 352 km2, 60% of it in the Pho sub-basin, and
85% of the total glaciated area (Table 8.8 and Figure 8.21).

Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the sub-basins is shown in Figure 8.22. More than 50% of the
glacier area lay between 5100 and 5600 masl. The maximum glaciated areas were 31.5 km2 In the Pho sub-basin
and 18.92 km2 in the Mo sub-basin, both at 5,300 to 5400 masl.

Manas basin

The Manas basin is located in the eastern part of Bhutan at 27.70° to 28.60° N latitude and 90.26° to 92.45° E
longitude (Figure 8.23). The river merges with the Brahmaputra river in Assam, India. It has four glaciated sub-basins,
the Mangde, Chamkhar, Kuri, and Dangme. The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are
summarised in Table 8.11.

Number, area, and ice reserves – The Manas basin had 1,090 glaciers (518 in the Kuri, 326 in the Dangme, 137
in the Mangde, and 109 in the Chamkhar sub-basins) with a total area of 1,157 km2 and estimated ice reserves of
85 km3 (Table 8.11). The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the sub-basins are shown in Figure
8.24. The Kuri sub-basin has the greatest glacier area (691 km2) and estimated ice reserves (56 km3), and the
Chamkhar the least (glacier area 75 km2, ice reserves 5 km3).

Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
summarised in Table 8.12 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 8.25. There were 711 glaciers in class
1 (≤0.5 km2), 65% of the total number but with less than 12% of the total area and just over 3% of the ice reserves.


                                                                                                                                       81
                  The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region

                                            Figure 8.23: Distribution of glaciers in the Manas basin




     Table 8.12: Glacier area classes in Manas basin

                                                                                                                               Mean area
                  Area                       Number                           Area                   Estimated ice reserves
     Area class                                                                                                                per glacier
                  (km2)
                                             Total           %                km2         %          km3           %           km2
     1                           ≤ 0.5                711          65.2         133.92        11.6         2.807         3.3          0.19
     2                      0.51-1.00                 150          13.8         106.77         9.2         3.387         4.0          0.71
     3                      1.01-5.00                 184          16.9         402.07        34.8      21.060          24.8          2.19
     4                    5.01-10.00                   30            2.8        223.14        19.3      18.316          21.6          7.44
     5                        ≥10.00                   15            1.4        291.04        25.2      39.414          46.4         19.40
                                    Total            1,090          100        1,156.94       100       84.984           100          1.06



     The medium-sized class 3 glaciers (1 to 5 km2) had 17% of the total number, but the greatest total area (35%), and
     the second largest ice reserves (25%). The 15 large glaciers, a little more than 1% of the total number, covered 25%
     of the total area and contained 46% of the ice reserves. The average area per glacier was just over 1 km2.

     Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was 7,223 masl and the lowest 4,388 masl (Table 8.11). Among
     the glaciers differentiated, CI glaciers were found from 7,223 to 4,391 masl and DC glaciers from 5,548 to
     4,524 masl (Figure 8.26).

     Glacier aspect – Figure 8.27 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. Similar
     numbers of glaciers (11 to 15%) had aspects in all directions except northwest, with 6%.



82
                                                                    8 Brahmaputra Basin



   Figure 8.24: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                     Figure 8.25: Percentage of glacier number,
       reserves in the sub-basins of the Manas basin                      area, and estimated ice reserves in the different
                                                                              glacier size classes in the Manas basin




         Figure 8.26: Elevation of CI and DC glaciers                            Figure 8.27: Aspect and mean slope
            in the sub-basins of the Manas basin                                    of glaciers in the Manas basin




Excluding glaciers in China




       Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to 50°. Towards the south, slopes from
       10° to 20° and 20° to 30° predominated, whereas towards the north, slopes from 20° to 30° and 30° to 40°
       predominated (Figure 8.27).

       The mean slope of the CI glaciers analysed in the sub-basins of the Manas basin ranged from 19° to 26° with an
       average slope of 21° while that of the DC glaciers varied from 11° to 31° with an average slope of 17° (Table
       8.11 and Figure 8.28). The mean slope of the DC glaciers in the Dangme sub-basin was markedly higher than that
       in the other sub-basins.


                                                                                                                          83
                     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



       Morphological glacier type – A large proportion of the glaciers were in TAR, China, and thus not classified
       morphologically, thus the results are not included here.

       Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers – Around 10% of the glacier area analysed, was covered by DC glaciers, with
       15% and 13% in the Chamkhar and Mangde sub-basins, and only 3% and 5% in the Dangme and Kuri sub-basins
       (where many glaciers were not analysed) (Table 8.11 and Figure 8.29).

       Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution in the parts of the sub-basins outside China is shown in Figure
       8.30. More than 75% of the glaciated area was between 5000 and 5700 masl. The maximum glaciated areas in
       the sub-basins were 24.3 km2 (9.1%) at 5400 to 5500 masl in Mangde sub-basin, and 14.3 km2 (5.3%) at 5300-
       5400 masl in Chamkhar sub-basin. The maximum glaciated area of the part of the Kuri and Dangme sub-basins
       within Bhutan was 9.93 km2 (3.7%) at 5100-5200 masl and less than 1.7 km2 (<1%) at 5000 to 5100 masl,
       respectively.

       Kameng basin

       The Kameng river originates in Tawang district from the glacial lake below the snow-capped Gori Chen mountain on
       the border between India and Tibet AR, China, in the eastern Himalayan mountains, and flows through Bhalukpong
       circle of West Kameng District, Arunachal Pradesh, and Sonitpur District of Assam, India (Figure 8.31). It is one of
       the major tributaries of the Brahmaputra river, joining it at Tezpur, just east of the Kolia Bhomora Setu bridge. The
       catchment area of the basin is about 10,347 km2. The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in the basin are
       summarised in Table 8.13.

       Number, area, and ice reserves – The Kameng basin contained 21 glaciers with a total glaciated area of close to
       11 km2 and estimated ice reserves of 0.44 km3 (Table 8.13). The largest single glacier had an area of 2.3 km2. All
       glaciers were CI type.

       Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
       summarised in Table 8.14 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 8.32. The 15 small class 1 glaciers
       (≤0.5 km2), about 70% of the total, contributed about 30% of the glacier area and contained 18% of the estimated
       ice reserves. There were three glaciers each in classes 2 and 3, with class 3 glaciers contributing 50% of the glacier
       area and 65% of the ice reserves. There were no large class 4 or 5 glaciers. The average area per glacier was
       0.5 km2.




       Figure 8.28: Mean slope of CI and DC glaciers                              Figure 8.29 Percentage distribution by area of CI and DC
            in the sub-basins of the Manas basin                                        glaciers in the sub-basins of the Manas basin




Excluding
      84 glaciers in China                                                       Excluding glaciers in China
                                                                      8 Brahmaputra Basin



             Figure 8.30: Area-altitude distribution                   Table 8.13: Glacier characteristics in the Kameng
                in the sub-basins of Manas basin                       basin*

                                                                       Parameter                      Units
                                                                       Basin area                     km2            10,347
                                                                       Latitude                       degrees    27.71-27.98
                                                                       Longitude                      degrees    92.41-92.77
                                                                       Number of glaciers             unit               21
                                                                       Total glacier area             km2             10.63
                                                                       Largest glacier area           km2              2.30
                                                                       Total ice reserves             km3              0.44
                                                                       Highest elevation (CI)         masl            6,205
                                                                       Lowest elevation (CI)          masl            4,465
                                                                       Mean glacier slope (CI)        degrees            21
                                                                       Average glacier area           km2              0.51
                                                                       *all glaciers in the basin were CI type



Excluding glaciers in China




                                      Figure 8.31: Distribution of glaciers in the Kameng basin




                                                                                                                               85
                  The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     Table 8.14: Glacier area classes in the Kameng basin

     Area class    Area                     Number                            Area                       Estimated ice reserves     Mean area
                   (km2)                                                                                                            per glacier
                                            Total           %                 km2           %            km3           %            km2
     1                           ≤ 0.5               15            71.4              3.21        30.2          0.080        18.2          0.21
     2                      0.51-1.00                 3            14.3              2.02        19.0          0.074        16.8          0.67
     3                      1.01-5.00                 3            14.3              5.40        50.8          0.286        65.0          1.80
     4                     5.01-10.00                 0              0.0             0.00          0.0         0.000          0.0         0.00
     5                        ≥10.00                  0              0.0             0.00          0.0         0.000          0.0         0.00
                                    Total            21             100             10.63         100          0.440       100.00         0.51




Figure 8.32: Percentage of glacier number, area,                                                  Figure 8.33: Aspect and mean slope
and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier                                                 of glaciers in the Kameng basin
        size classes in the Kameng basin




Figure 8.34: Comparative distribution of different                                              Figure 8.35: Area-altitude distribution of
  glacier types in the Kameng basin by number,                                                        glaciers in the Kameng basin
         area, and estimated ice reserves




86
                                                                      8 Brahmaputra Basin



 Table 8.15: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Kameng basin

                                                                                                                            Mean area
 Glacier type                     Number                   Area                             Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                            per glacier
                                  Total         %          km2                %             km3             %               km2
              Miscellaneous                 2        9.5          0.75               7.1          0.022              5.0           0.38
              Ice apron                     5       23.8          0.54               5.1          0.009              2.1           0.11

   Mountain
              Cirque                        0        0.0          0.00               0.0          0.000              0.0           0.00
              Niche                         4       19.1          0.47               4.4          0.008              1.8           0.12
              Basin                        10       47.6          8.88             83.5           0.401         91.1               0.89
 Valley       Trough                       0         0.0          0.00               0.0          0.000              0.0           0.00
                          Total            21       100           10.63              100          0.440          100               0.51


                                                                   Table 8.16: Glacier characteristics in the Subansiri
Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was
                                                                   basin*
6,205 masl and the lowest 4,465 masl, both CI
glaciers as there were no debris covered areas.                    Parameter                      Units
Glacier aspect – Figure 8.33 shows the percentage                  Basin area                     km2                          26,343
of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope.                 Latitude                       degrees                  27.80-28.79
The majority of glaciers faced southeast or east                   Longitude                      degrees                  91.89-93.50
(33% each), with a further 24% facing south and 9%                 Number of glaciers             unit                            493*
southwest.                                                         CI glacier area                km2                             51.53
                                                                   Total glacier area             km2                          486.23
Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin
                                                                   Largest glacier area           km2                             53.33
was 21°. Slopes of 10° to 20°, followed by slopes
                                                                   Total ice reserves             km3                             35.94
of 20° to 30°, were most common in east and
southeast facing glaciers, and slopes of 30° to 40° in             Highest elevation              masl                            6,514

south facing glaciers. Some 5% of glaciers had slopes              Lowest elevation               masl                            4,223
of less than 10%, all facing south (Figure 8.33).                  Glacier elevation              masl                     4,223-6,514
                                                                   Glacier slope                  degrees                           25
Morphological glacier type – The morphological                     Average glacier area           km2                              0.99
classification of glaciers in the Kameng basin
                                                             * most of the basin lies in China, CI/DC differentiation, and
is summarised in Table 8.15; the comparative                 hypsography were only evaluated for the 62 glaciers within India;
distribution by number, area, and estimated ice              there were no DC glaciers in this area.

reserves is shown graphically in Figure 8.34. All the
glaciers in this basin were of mountain type, the majority basin type (48%), followed by ice apron (24%) and niche
type (19%) glaciers. Mountain basin type glaciers contribute 83% of the glaciated area and contained 91% of the
estimated ice reserves.

Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution is shown in Figure 8.35. The distribution was heterogeneous.
The maximum glaciated area was about 1.88 km2 at 5,600-5,700 masl, 18% of the total.

Subansiri basin

The Subansiri river originates in China, flows east and southeast into India, then south to the Assam valley, where it
joins the Brahmaputra (Figure 8.36). It has a drainage area of 26,343 km2. The distribution and characteristics of
the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 8.16.

Number, area, and ice reserves – The Subansiri basin had 493 glaciers, with a total glaciated area of 486 km2 and
estimated ice reserves of 36 km3 (Table 8.16). The largest individual glacier had an area of about 53 km2.

Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
summarised in Table 8.17 and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 8.37. There were 326 glaciers, 66% of
the total, in the smallest class 1 (≤0.5 km2), covering 12% of the glaciated area and containing 3 % of the estimated

                                                                                                                                          87
                  The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



                                       Figure 8.36: Distribution of glaciers in the Subansiri basin




     Table 8.17: Glacier area classes in the Subansiri basin

     Area class      Area                   Number                            Area                     Estimated ice reserves    Mean area
                     (km2)                                                                                                       per glacier
                                            Total           %                 km2           %          km3           %           km2
     1                           ≤ 0.5              326            66.1             59.85       12.3         1.173         3.3          0.18
     2                       0.51-1.00               78            15.8             55.77       11.5         1.713         4.8          0.72
     3                       1.01-5.00               70            14.2         152.04          31.3         7.800        21.7          2.17
     4                    5.01-10.00                 14              2.8        100.86          20.7         8.072        22.5          7.20
     5                         ≥10.00                  5             1.0        117.70          24.2      17.185          47.8         23.54
                                    Total           493             100         486.23          100       35.943           100          0.99


     ice reserves. The 5 glaciers in class 5 (≥10.00 km2) contributed about 24 % of the glacier area and 48% of the
     estimated ice reserves. The average area per glacier overall was 0.99 km2.

     Glacier elevation – The highest glacier was at 6,514 masl and the lowest at 4,223 masl.

     Glacier aspect – Figure 8.38 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. The majority
     of glaciers faced east (24%), southeast (27%), or south (24%), and about 16% southwest.

     Slope – The glacier slopes ranged from 10° to 40° with a mean of 25°. Slopes of 20° to 30° were most common
     in glaciers of all aspects, followed by slopes of 30° to 40°. Less than 5% of glaciers with all aspects had slopes of
     10° to 20°.

88
                                                               8 Brahmaputra Basin



Figure 8.37: Percentage of glacier number, area,                     Figure 8.38: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier                               in the Subansiri basin
        size classes in the Subansiri basin




 Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution of the 62 glaciers evaluated is shown in Figure 8.39. Among
 these, the maximum glaciated area was 6.85 km2 at 5,300 to 5,400 masl, 13% of the total area. Glaciated areas
 of more than 1 km2 were found from 4600 masl to 6,300 masl.

 Dihang basin

 The Dihang is a large tributary of the Brahmaputra in Upper Assam. The river originates in Arunachal Pradesh and
 flows through Assam to its confluence with the Brahmaputra. It has two glaciated sub-basins, the Dibhang
 (11,345 km2) and the Lohit (23,067 km2) (Figure 8.40). The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in the
 two sub-basins are summarised in Table 8.18.

 Number, area, and ice reserves – The Dihang basin had
 955 glaciers with a total glaciated area of 1,305 km2                       Figure 8.39: Area-altitude distribution
 and estimated ice reserves of about 111 km3 (Table                             of glaciers in the Subansiri basin
 8.18). The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of
 glaciers in the sub-basins are shown in Figure 8.41. The
 Lohit sub-basin had 87% of the glaciers, 95% of the
 area, and 97% of the estimated ice reserves.

 Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated
 ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are
 summarised in Table 8.19 and shown as a percentage
 of the total in Figure 8.42. The majority of glaciers were
 in the smallest class (547, or 57%); but contributed only
 8% of the glacier area and less than 2% of the estimated
 ice reserves. There were 25 glaciers in each of the
 largest classes (5-10 km2 and more than 10 km2), but
 the largest class contributed 38% of the glaciated area
 and contained 64% of the estimated ice reserves. The
 average glacier area was 1.37 km2.

                                                                The 62 glaciers in India only
                                                                                                                       89
                   The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region


                                          Figure 8.40: Distribution of glaciers in the Dihang basin




     Table 8.18: Glacier characteristics in the Dihang basin

     Parameter                                    Units                        Sub-basin                                    Dihang
                                                                               Dibhang              Lohit*
     Basin area                                   km2                                      11,345                 23,067               34,412**
     Latitude                                     degrees                             28.85-29.37             28.20-29.54            28.20-29.54
     Longitude                                    degrees                             95.77-96.51             96.03-97.76            95.77-97.76
     Number of glaciers                           unit                                       124                     831                    955
     CI glacier area                              km2                                       71.65                  22.54                  94.18
     Total glacier area                           km2                                       71.65               1,233.45               1,305.10
     Largest glacier area                         km2                                        3.64                  96.22                  96.22
     Total ice reserves                           km3                                        3.31                 107.66                 110.97
     Highest elevation                            masl                                      5,310                  5,902                  5,902
     Lowest elevation                             masl                                      3,707                  2,435                  2,435
     Glacier elevation                            masl                                3,707-5,310            4,211-5,693*            2,435-5,902
     Mean glacier slope                           degrees                                     22                      27                     24
     Average glacier area                         km2                                        0.58                   1.48                   1.37
     *extends into China (area in China contains 784 glaciers, CI/DC differentiation, and hypsography refers to the remaining 171 glaciers,
     all the glaciers in the Dibhang sub-basin and 47 glaciers in the Lohit sub-basin; there were no DC glaciers in this area);
     ** includes area of non-glaciated sub-basins



90
                                                                      8 Brahmaputra Basin



Figure 8.41: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                      Figure 8.42: Percentage of glacier number, area,
   reserves in the sub-basins of the Dihang basin                         and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
                                                                                   size classes in the Dihang basin




   Table 8.19: Glacier area classes in the Dihang basin

   Area class   Area              Number                   Area                             Estimated ice reserves         Mean area
                (km2)                                                                                                      per glacier
                                  Total         %          km2            %                 km3            %               km2
   1                    ≤ 0.5             547       57.3         103.60           7.9              2.056             1.9          0.19
   2             0.51-1.00                148       15.5         107.41           8.2              3.345             3.0          0.73
   3             1.01-5.00                210       22.0         436.91         33.5              21.769        19.6              2.08
   4            5.01-10.00                 25        2.6         167.37         12.8              12.926        11.7              6.69
   5               ≥10.00                  25        2.6         489.80         37.5              70.874        63.9             19.59
                          Total           955       100     1,305.10             100          110.971            100              1.37


  Glacier elevation – Glaciers were found from 5,902 to 2,435 masl in the Lohit basin and from 5,310 to
  3,707 masl in the Dihang basin (Table 8.18).

  Glacier aspect – Figure 8.43 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. More than
  22% of glaciers faced north, 18% northeast, and between 11 and 13%, east, southeast, and northwest. Only a
  small number had southern aspects.

  Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers ranged from 10° to 50° (Figure 8.43) with an overall average of 24°.
  Slopes of 20° to 30° were most common in glaciers of all aspects, followed by slopes of 30° to 40°.

  Hypsography – The glacier area-altitude distribution of the 124 glaciers in the Dibhang sub basin and 47 glaciers in
  the Lohit sub-basin within India is shown in Figure 8.44. The maximum glaciated area in the Dihang basin was
  18.0 km2, 18% of the total, at 4,700 to 4,800 masl. The highest concentration of glaciers was at 4700-4800
  masl in the Dibhang sub-basin and 5000-5100 masl in the Lohit sub-basin.

  Yarlung Zangbo basin

  The Yarlung Zangbo river originates in the vicinity of Mansarovar in southern Tibet in China, passes through the state
  of Arunachal Pradesh in India, widens out, and eventually becomes the Brahmaputra river. It has nine sub-basins: the
  Maquan (33,201 km2), Yarlung Zangbo (90,555 km2), Dogxung Zangbo (20,097 km2), Xiangqu (7,443 km2),

                                                                                                                                         91
             The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



 Figure 8.43: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers                                Figure 8.44: Area-altitude distribution of glaciers
               in the Dihang basin                                                   in the sub-basins of the Dihang basin




                                                                         Only for the 47 glaciers outside China




                           Figure 8.45: Distribution of glaciers in the Yarlung Zangbo basin




92
                                                                8 Brahmaputra Basin



Figure 8.46: Glacier number, area, and estimated                     Figure 8.47: Percentage of glacier number, area,
       ice reserves in the sub-basins of the                         and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
              Yarlung Zangbo basin                                       size classes in the Yarlung Zangbo basin




 Nianchu (14,270 km2), Langkamu (11,505 km2), Lhasa (32,826 km2), Nyang (17,866 km2), and Yigong Zangbo
 (29,016 km2) (Figure 8.45).

 The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 8.20. The glaciers all
 lie in China and were therefore not classified morphologically or differentiated into CI and DC glaciers.

 Number, area, and ice reserves – The Yarlung Zangbo basin had 8,075 glaciers with a total area of 10,154 km2
 and estimated ice reserves of 996 km3 (Table 8.20). The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in
 the sub-basins are shown in Figure 8.46. The Yigong Zangbo basin had the most glaciers, greatest glaciated area,
 and greatest estimated ice reserves. The largest individual glacier had an area of 204 km2, the biggest in the whole
 Brahmaputra basin.

 Glacier area classes – The number, area, and estimated
 ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are    Figure 8.48: Elevation of glaciers in the Yarlung Zangbo basin
 summarised in Table 8.21 and shown as a percentage
 of the total in Figure 8.47. More than 77% of glaciers
 were in the smallest class (≤1.0 km2) but contributed
 only 9% of the glacier area and less than 2% of the ice
 reserves. The 149 glaciers in the biggest class (≥10.00
 km2), less than 2% of the total, contributed 40% of the
 area, and contained more than 70% of the estimated
 ice reserves. The average glacier area was 1.26 km2.

 Glacier elevation – The highest glacier elevation was
 6,536 masl in the Nianchu sub-basin and the lowest
 3,348 masl in the Yigong Zangbo sub-basin (Figure
 8.48). The Yigong Zangbo basin had the lowest
 glaciers, both top and terminus, of all the sub-basins
 and the Yarlung Zangbo the greatest range.


                                                                Elevation data for Nyang sub-basin not available.        93
94




     Table 8.20: Glacier characteristics in the Yarlung Zangbo basin

     Parameter              Units     Sub-basin                                                                                                                                       Yarlung
                                                                                                                                                                                      Zangbo
                                      Maquan           Yarlung          Dogxung-        Xiangqu        Nianchu         Langkamu      Lhasa           Nyang           Yigong-
                                                       Zangbo           Zangbo                                                                                       Zangbo
     Basin area             km2            33,201          90,555           20,097           7,443         14,270          11,505        32,826          17,866          29,016          256,779
     Latitude               degrees   28.79-30.93      28.55-30.14      29.33-30.36     29.87-30.25    27.82-28.98     28.19-29.07   29.56-31.01     29.44-30.58     29.19-31.03      27.82-31.03
     Longitude              degrees   82.03-85.35      84.57-96.08      85.40-88.46     89.24-90.02    88.85-90.18     90.08-91.29   90.09-93.14     92.24-94.33     93.02-97.09      82.03-97.09
     Number of glaciers     unit            1,089           1,235              401             137               133          165             861            1,095        2,959             8,075
                                                                                                                                                                                                       The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




     Total glacier area     km2            830.30         1,139.06           77.04           42.35         256.38          223.33        537.59        1,154.79         5,892.83       10,153.67
     Largest glacier area   km2             33.31           60.15             3.03            4.71          30.20           85.97            27.35           50.03       204.36           204.36
     Total ice reserves     km3             58.23           85.98             2.05            1.47          20.16           27.63            27.71           78.76       694.18           996.17
     Highest elevation      masl            6,402           6,223            6,145           5,930          6,536           6,410            6,392             NA         5,796             6,536
     Lowest elevation       masl            4,877           3,616            4,883           5,289          4,858           5,055            5,224             NA         3,348             3,348
     Mean slope             degrees               25              26               24             26             26            26              23              NA               27               25
     Average glacier area   km2                0.76              0.92         0.19            0.31           1.93            1.35             0.62            1.05             1.99             1.26
     NA = Not available
                                                                       9 Irrawaddy Basin



Figure 8.49: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers                                 Figure 8.50: Mean slope of glaciers in the
         in the Yarlung Zangbo basin                                                  Yarlung Zangbo sub-basins




 Table 8.21: Glacier area classes in the Yarlung Zangbo basin

 Area class   Area                   Number                     Area                        Estimated ice reserves    Mean area
              (km2)                                                                                                   per glacier
                                     Total           %          km2           %             km3          %            km2
 1                         ≤ 0.5         5,064           62.7     935.54              9.2      17.525           1.8          0.18
 2                     0.51-1.00         1,202           14.9     847.40              8.4      24.794           2.5          0.70
 3                     1.01-5.00         1,477           18.3   3,125.88             30.8    154.378           15.5          2.12
 4                    5.01-10.00              183         2.3   1,228.58             12.1      94.679           9.5          6.71
 5                       ≥10.00               149         1.9   4,016.27             39.6    704.792           70.8         26.95
                             Total           8,075       100    10,153.67             100     996.167           100          1.26




Glacier aspect – Figure 8.49 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. The great
majority of glaciers faced north (40%) or northeast (27%), with very few having a generally southern aspect.

Slope – The mean slope of the glaciers ranged from 10° to 60°. Slopes of 20° to 30° were the most common in
glaciers of all aspects, followed by slopes of 30° to 40° (Figure 8.49). The average slope of the glaciers in the
individual sub-basins ranged from 23° to 27° (Figure 8.50), with an overall average slope of 25° (Table 8.20).




                                                                                                                                    95
                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




     9 Irrawaddy Basin


     The Irrawaddy (Irawadi) is the principal river of Myanmar and fed by tributaries from Myanmar and China. The
     river forms in Kachin State at the confluence of the Mali and Nmai rivers north of Myitkyina. The western branch
     of the Mali river originates north of Putao from the end of the southern Himalayas, and is called Nam Kiu locally.
     The easternmost branch of the Nmai river originates in the Languela glacier north of Putao in China. The area has
     a mainly tropical climate; the watershed area is covered by clouds and fog most of the time and perennial ice and
     snow are only found in a limited area. The Irrawaddy flows through the country from north to south bisecting the
     centre and empties through a nine-armed delta into the Indian Ocean. From Myitkyina, the river is about 2,050
     km long; the catchment area is about 426,501km2 of which 202,745 km2 falls within the HKH region. The Nmai
     river is not navigable because of the strong current, whereas the smaller western river, the Mali, is navigable despite
     having a few rapids. The Chindwin river is the largest tributary of the Irrawaddy. It flows 840 km before joining the
     Irrawaddy river close to Mandalay.

     Data

     The mapping and inventory of the glacierised                   Table 9.1: Landsat images used for the Irrawady basin
     areas was carried out using ETM+ images                        (for areas outside China)
     from 2004, 2005, and 2009. The                                 Path-                                                               Sub-
     topographic characteristics were derived                                Images                         Date            Used for
                                                                    Row                                                                 basin
     using the SRTM DEM. A single Landsat                           133-40   l72133040_04020041211          11/12/2004 correction Maikha
     image was sufficient to map the glaciers,                      133-40   l72133040_04020091107          07/11/2009 analysis         Maikha
     which are confined to the northern part of                     133-41   l72133041_04120091107          01/11/2009 analysis         Maikha
     the basin. The list of images used is shown in                 133-41   l72133041_04120051112          12/11/2005 correction Maikha
     Table 9.1.

     Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

     The glaciers are limited to the northern part of the                    Table 9.2: Glacier characteristics in the Irrawaddy
     Irrawaddy basin in the watershed of the Mai river                       basin*
     (Figure 9.1). The distribution and characteristics of the               Parameter                    Units            Unit/column
     glaciers are summarised in Table 9.2                                    Basin area                   km2                          202,745
                                                                             Latitude                     degrees                 28.06-28.77
     Number, area, and ice reserves
                                                                             Longitude                    degrees                 97.32-98.17
     The Irrawaddy basin had 133 glaciers with a total                       Number of glaciers           unit                             133
     area of 35 km2 and estimated ice reserves of 1 km3                      Total glacier area (CI)      km2                            35.46
     (Table 9.2). There are no previous published reports
                                                                             Largest glacier area         km2                             2.91
     describing mapping results for the 87 glaciers within
                                                                             Total ice reserves           km3                             1.29
     the territory of Myanmar.
                                                                             Highest elevation            masl                           5,695
     Glacier area classes                                                    Lowest elevation             masl                           4,256

     The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of                         Mean glacier slope           degrees                           25

     glaciers in the different size classes are summarised in                Average glacier area         km2                             0.27
     Table 9.3 and shown as a percentage of the total in                     *extends into China (area in China contains 46 glaciers; CI/DC
     Figure 9.2. There were no glaciers in the largest size                  diffeentiation was only applied to the remaining 87 glaciers, there
                                                                             were no DC glaciers among these)



96
                                                                     9 Irrawaddy Basin



                                  Figure 9.1: Distribution of glaciers in the Irrawaddy basin




Table 9.3: Glacier area classes in the Irrawaddy basin

Area class    Area                  Number                   Area                         Estimated ice reserves    Mean area
              (km2)                                                                                                 per glacier
                                    Total         %          km2            %             km3           %           km2
1                         ≤ 0.5             115       86.5         14.49          40.9          0.301        23.4         0.13
2                     0.51-1.00              10        7.5          7.50          21.2          0.284        22.0         0.75
3                     1.01-5.00               8        6.0         13.47          38.0          0.703        54.6         1.68
4                 5.01-10.00                  0        0.0          0.00            0.0         0.000         0.0         0.00
5                        ≥10.00               0        0.0          0.00            0.0         0.000         0.0         0.00
                            Total           133       100          35.46           100          1.287         100         0.27




classes, and almost all were smaller than 3 km2. Around 86% of the glaciers were in the smallest class 1
(≤0.5 km2), covering 41% of the glaciated area and containing 23% of the estimated ice reserves. The largest
glacier was GLIMS ID G097509E28365N (Imaygr10_53) with an area 2.91 km2 located at 28.37° N latitude
and 97.51° E longitude. The average area per glacier was 0.27 km2.

Elevations of glaciers

The highest elevation in Myanmar is at Hkakabo Razi (5,881 masl) in Kachin State. The glaciers extended from
5,695 masl to 4,256 masl. The largest glacier extended from 5,548 masl to 4,292 masl.

                                                                                                                                  97
                     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



     Aspects

     Figure 9.3 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. More than 40% of the glaciers
     had a south aspect, with about 15% each facing southeast and southwest. There were no glaciers facing north,
     indicating the strong orographic control of moist airflows coming from the south.

     Slope

     The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged from 10° to 50°, with slopes of 20° to 30° most common
     regardless of aspect, followed by slopes of 10° to 20° and 30° to 40°.

     Morphological glacier type

     Only the 87 glaciers within Myanmar were classified morphologically. The classification is summarised in Table 9.4
     and the comparative distribution by number, area, and estimated ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure 9.4. All
     the classified glaciers were mountain type, the great majority basin type (71%) followed by ice apron type (18%).
     Mountain basin type glaciers covered 89% of the glaciated area and contained 94% of the estimated ice reserves.




     Table 9.4: Morphological classification of glaciers in the Irrawaddy basin*

     Glacier type                              Number                            Area                      Estimated ice reserves     Mean area
                                                                                                                                      per glacier
                                               Total          %                  km2            %          km3           %            km2
                    Miscellaneous                        0              0.0               0.0        0.0         0.000          0.0          0.0
                    Ice apron                           16            18.4              2.16         9.0         0.054          5.9         0.13

         Mountain
                    Cirque                               4              4.6             0.32         1.3         0.005          0.5         0.08
                    Niche                                5              5.8             0.09         0.4         0.000        0.04          0.02
                    Basin                               62            71.3             21.43        89.3         0.870        93.6          0.35
     Valley         Trough                               0              0.0             0.00         0.0         0.000          0.0          0.0
                                       Total            87             100              23.99        100         0.929         100          0.28
     * excluding glaciers in China, relates to 87 glaciers within Myanmar




 Figure 9.2: Percentage of glacier number, area,                                                Figure 9.3: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier                                                         in the Irrawaddy basin
       size classes in the Irrawaddy basin




98
                                                             9 Irrawaddy Basin



Figure 9.4: Comparative distribution of different                       Figure 9.5: Area-altitude distribution of
glacier types in the Irrawaddy basin by number,                             glaciers in the Irrawaddy basin
         area, and estimated ice reserves




                                                            Excluding glaciers in China




 Hypsography

 The glacier area-altitude distribution of the glaciers in the basin within Myanmar is shown in Figure 9.5. The
 maximum glaciated area was 7.52 km2 at 5,000 to 5,100 masl, 21% of the total. Glaciated areas of more than
 1 km2 were found from 4,600 to 5,500 masl.




                                                                                                                    99
                     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




      10 Salween Basin


      The Salween river rises in the Qinghai Mountains on the Tibetan Plateau, near the headwaters of the Mekong
      and Yangtze rivers. It initially flows west but then makes a great bend to the east, entering the Chinese province of
      Yunnan and flowing on through Myanmar, and Thailand, before draining into the Andaman Sea (Figure 10.1). For
      much of its length, the Salween’s course runs almost parallel to that of the much larger Mekong in the east. Although
      the commonly accepted name is Salween, the river is also known by other names: Nu or Nujiang in China,
      Thanlwin in southern Myanmar, and Salawin at the border of Thailand and Myanmar.

      The river basin is one of the largest in Southeast Asia; it covers 363,778 km2 of which 58% lies in the HKH region.
      The upper and middle reaches of the basin are glaciated.

      Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

      The river flows in a semi-circle and the glaciers are found on both sides of the river within the western part of the
      basin. They all lie in China (Figure 10.2) within four third-level tributaries with the codes 5N22 (Lower reaches),
      5N23 (Naqu), 5N24 (Middle Reaches), and 5N25 (Yuqujiang). The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers
      in each sub-basin are summarised in Table 10.1.

      Number, area, and ice reserves
      The basin has a total area of 211,122 km2, with 2,113 glaciers covering an area of 1,352 km2 and containing
      estimated ice reserves of 88 km3 (Table 10.1). The mean glacier area was 0.66 km2. The number, area, and
      estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the sub-basins are shown in Figure 10.3. The Lower reaches sub-basin (5N22)
      had the greatest number of glaciers and largest area and estimated ice reserves and Yuqujiang (5N25) sub-basin
      the least. The largest glacier was GLIMS ID G094773E30627N (5N22_676) with an area of 40 km2 and
      estimated ice reserves of 6.58 km3, located in sub-basin 5N22.




       Table 10.1: Glacier characteristics in the Salween basin

       Parameter                    Units           Sub-basin                                                                    Salween
                                                    Lower reaches         Naqu                 Middle Reaches Yuqujiang
                                                    (5N22)                (5N23)               (5N24)         (5N25)
       Basin area within HKH        km2                     132,103                  56,517          13,123          9,376           211,122*
       Latitude                     degrees            28.38-30.81               30.80-32.76     30.28-32.13    28.42-30.58        28.38-32.76
       Longitude                    degrees            94.54-98.71               91.50-94.87     94.65-97.02    96.84-98.68        91.50-98.71
       Number of glaciers           unit                          892                   835             281               105              2,113
       Total glacier area           km2                       713.85                 438.54          156.25          43.13           1,351.76
       Largest glacier area         km2                        40.06                  35.49           35.49               9.58             40.06
       Total ice reserves           km3                        52.03                  23.99            9.41               2.26             87.69
       Highest elevation            masl                       6,471                  5,887           5,985          6,294                 6,471
       Lowest elevation             masl                       4,457                  5,257           4,578          3,786                 3,786
       Mean glacier slope           degrees                        23                    24              25                27                25
       Average glacier area         km2                          0.80                  0.53            0.56               0.41              0.64
       *includes area of not glaciated sub-basins




100
                                                               10 Salween Basin



                           Figure 10.1: Basin and drainage systems of the Salween river




     1. Lower reaches (5N22)      2. Naqu (5N23)               3. Middle Reaches (5N24)     4. Yuqujiang (5N25)




Glacier area classes

The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are summarised in Table 10.2
and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 10.4. The great majority of the glaciers, 1,596 or 76% of the
total, were in class 1 (≤0.5 km2), and together contributed about 20% of the glacier area and just under 6% of the
ice reserves. The 14 glaciers in class 5 (≥10.00 km2), less than 1% of the total, included 4 with areas greater than
30 km2; together they contributed 24% of the glacier area and 51% of the estimated ice reserves.



                                                                                                                       101
                   The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



                                          Figure 10.2: Distribution of glaciers in the Salween basin




      Table 10.2: Glacier area classes in the Salween basin

      Area class      Area                   Number                            Area                   Estimated ice reserves    Mean area
                      (km2)                                                                                                     per glacier
                                             Total           %                 km2         %          km3           %           km2
      1                           ≤ 0.5           1,596             75.5         276.92        20.5         5.163         5.9          0.17
      2                       0.51-1.00               261           12.4         181.57        13.4         5.465         6.2          0.70
      3                       1.01-5.00               220           10.4         409.54        30.3      19.459          22.2          1.86
      4                    5.01-10.00                  22           1.04         160.64        11.9      13.029          14.9          7.30
      5                         ≥10.00                 14             0.7        323.10        23.9      44.573          50.8         23.08
                                     Total           2,113           100        1,351.76       100       87.689           100          0.64

102
                                                             10 Salween Basin


Figure 10.3 Glacier number, area, and estimated ice               Figure 10.4: Percentage of glacier number, area,
   reserves in the sub-basins of the Salween basin                and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
                                                                          size classes in the Salween basin




                                                                     Figure 10.5: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
  Glacier elevation
                                                                                  in the Salween basin
  The highest glacier elevation was 6,471 masl in
  the Lower reaches (5N22) sub-basin and the lowest
  3,786 masl in Yuqujiang (5N25) sub-basin (Table
  10.1); the majority of the glaciers lay between 4,500
  and 6,000 masl. The greatest elevation range was
  found in Yuqujiang sub-basin and the least in Naqu
  (5N23) sub-basin.

  Glacier aspect

  Figure 10.5 shows the percentage of glaciers with
  different aspects and mean slope. Almost 40% of
  glaciers had a north aspect, and a further 31% a
  northeast aspect. Very few glaciers had a southern
  aspect.

  Slope

  The mean slope of the glaciers in the basin ranged
  from 10° to 50°, with slopes of 20° to 30° the most
  common for all aspects, followed by slopes of 10°
  to 20° and 30° to 40° (Figure 10.5). The average
  slope of the glaciers in the sub-basins was similar with
  an overall average of 25° (Table 10.1).




                                                                                                                   103
                    The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




      11 Mekong Basin


      The Mekong river, originates from the eastern and western Tanggula Range in the central part of the Tibetan Plateau
      and flows through the three provinces of Qinghai, Tibet, and Yunnan in China, and thence through Burma, Thailand,
      Cambodia, and Vietnam into the South China Sea (Figure 11.1). Within China it is known as the Lancang river. The
      Mekong has a total length of 4,880 km and is the 10th longest river in the world and the 7th longest in Asia. The
      Mekong has two main tributaries: the Zaqu river in the east, and the Ngomqu river in the west. The part of the basin
      within the HKH region covers an area of 841,322 km2, about 17% of the whole basin. The glaciers in the Mekong
      basin are all located in the upper reaches of the river in China.

      Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

      The major Mekong basin has three glaciated basins – Middle Reaches (5L2), Angqu (5L3), and Ziqu (5L4). The
      distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each basin (Figure 11.2) are summarised in Table 11.1.

      Number, area, and ice reserves

      The Mekong major river basin had 482 glaciers with a total area of 235 km2 and estimated ice reserves of 11 km3.
      The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the basins are shown in Figure 11.3. The 5L4 basin
      had the most glaciers (227), glaciated area, and estimated ice reserves. Glaciers in 5L2 had the largest mean area
      (0.93 km2); the average glacier area across the basin was 0.49 km2. The largest single glacier was GLIMS ID
      G098723E28450N (M5L0gr_33) located in the 5L2 basin, which covered an area of 9.76 km2

      Glacier area classes

      The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are summarised in Table 11.2
      and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 11.4. There were 384 glaciers in class 1 (≤0.5 km2), 80% of the
      total number with 27% of the total area and 11% of the ice reserves. The two large glaciers with an area ≥10 km2
      covered 37% of the total area and contained 60% of the ice reserves. There were no glaciers ≥10.00 km2, and the
      50 glaciers (10%) with a size of 1 to 5 km2 contributed the most to the area (40%) and estimated ice reserves (44%).


      Table 11.1: Glacier characteristics in the Mekong basin

      Parameter                                         Units                   Basin                                             Mekong
                                                                                Angqu            Ziqu             Middle
                                                                                (5L3)            (5L4)            Reaches (5L2)
      Basin area within HKH                             km2                             24,559           36,717         52,330        138,876
      Latitude                                          degrees                  30.53-32.48      32.64-33.73      28.30-29.39     28.30-33.73
      Longitude                                         degrees                  94.15-97.38      94.24-96.96      98.14-98.76     94.15-98.76
      Number of glaciers                                unit                              196              227              59             482
      Total glacier area                                km2                              65.94           113.91          54.77         234.61
      Largest glacier area                              km2                               5.83             7.62           9.76             9.76
      Total ice reserves                                km3                              2.168            4.927          3.581         10.676
      Highest elevation                                 masl                             5,703            5,644          6,361          6,361
      Lowest elevation                                  masl                             5,047            4,845          2,891          2,891
      Mean glacier slope                                degrees                            26               26              26              26
      Average glacier area                              km2                               0.34             0.50           0.93             0.49



104
                             11 Mekong Basin



Figure 11.1: Mekong river basin and drainage system




                                                      105
      The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



                     Figure 11.2: Distribution of glaciers in the Mekong (Lancang) basin




106
                                                                   11 Mekong Basin



  Figure 11.3: Glacier number, area, and ice                            Figure 11.4: Percentage of glacier number, area,
         reserves in the Mekong basin                                   and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
                                                                                size classes in the Mekong basin




 Table 11.2: Glacier area classes in the Mekong basin

 Area class           Number                   Area                             Estimated ice reserves         Mean area
                                                                                                               per glacier
                      Total          %         km2             %                km3            %               km2
         ≤ 0.5                 384       80           62.31               27          1.131              11           0.16
    0.51 - 1.00                41         9           28.06               12          0.846               8           0.68
    1.01 - 5.00                50        10           94.88               40          4.660              44           1.90
   5.01 - 10.00                 7         1           49.36               21          4.039              38           7.05
        ≥10.00                  0         0            0.00                 0         0.000               0           0.00
              Total            482       100          234.61             100          10.68              100           0.49

Glacier elevation
The highest glacier elevation was 6,361 and the
                                                                           Figure 11.5: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
lowest 2,891 masl both in the Middle Reaches (5L2)
                                                                                        in the Mekong basin
basin (Table 11.1). The glacier elevation range in
Angqu (5L3) and Ziqu (5L4) basins was less than
1,000 m; most of the glaciers were located between
5,000 and 5,500 masl.

Glacier aspect
More than 40% of glaciers had a north aspect, and
24% a northeast aspect (Figure 11.5). There were very
few glaciers with a more southerly aspect.

Slope
The mean slope of almost all the glaciers in the basins
ranged from 10° to 50°, with less than 1% having
slopes more or less than this. Slopes of 20° to 30° were
most common followed by 30° to 40°. The mean slope
of glaciers in the three basins was similar; the overall
average slope was 25° (Table 11.1).
                                                                                                                              107
                  The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




      12 Yangtze Basin


      The Yangtze river rises in the Qinghai-Tibetan Plateau and traverses China from west to east for more than 6000 km
      before emptying into the East China Sea at Shanghai. It is the longest river in Asia and the third longest in the world.
      The Yangtze river basin (Figure 12.1) has a total area of 2,065,763 km2, of which 565,102 km2 lies in the HKH
      region, and is the largest of the HKH river basins, draining one-fifth of China’s land area (Figure 12.1).

      Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

      The area of the major Yangtze basin within the HKH region consists of four glaciated basins: the Jinsha (5K4),
      Yalong (5K5), Minjiang (5K6), and Jialing (5K7) (Figure 12.2). The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in
      each sub-basin are summarised in Table 12.1

      Number, area, and ice reserves

      The major Yangtze basin contained 1,661 glaciers, with a total area of 1,660 km2 and estimated ice reserves of
      121 km3 (Table 12.1). The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the basins are shown in Figure
      12.3. The Jinsha basin had the most glaciers (1,189 or 70% of the total), and greatest glacier area (75%) and
      estimated ice reserves (76%). The Jialing basin had only one glacier with an area of 0.12 km2 and estimated ice
      reserves of 0.002 km3. The largest glacier was GLIMS ID G091105E33503N (5K45_96) with an area of 55 km2.




                                               Figure 12.1: Location of the Yangtze river basin




108
                                                                          12 Yangtse Basin



Glacier area classes

The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are summarised in Table 12.2
and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 12.4.

More than 67% of the glaciers were in the smallest area class size (<1 km2), together contributing 12% to the area
and just over 3% of the estimated ice reserves. The 27 glaciers with an area ≥10 km2, less than 2% of the total,
covered 32% of the area and contained 56% of the basin’s ice reserves. Two of these glaciers had an area greater
than 30 km2. The mean glacier area in the basin was 1.05 km2.


Table 12.1: Glacier characteristics in the Yangtze basin

Parameter                 Units              Basin                                                                       Yangtze
                                             Jinsha            Yalong            Minjiang             Jialing
Basin area within HKH     km2                        262,892       128,178              107,243                 21,790      565,102*
Latitude                  degrees             28.21-35.78       29.08-32.07         29.25-33.29          32.64-32.64      28.21-35.78
Longitude                 degrees             90.56-100.4       98.79-101.8        101.10-103.9        103.89-103.9       90.56-103.9
Number of glaciers        unit                         1,189             193                   278                  1              1,661
Total glacier area        km2                        1243.02        119.49                   297.22               0.12       1659.85
Largest glacier area      km2                          54.59            18.31                 25.81               0.12             54.59
Total ice reserves        km3                          92.02             6.71                 22.67              0.002        121.40
Highest elevation         masl                         6,122            5,779                 6,270              5,041             6,270
Lowest elevation          masl                         4,479            3,787                 2,972              4,951             2,972
Mean glacier slope        degrees                        25               26                    29                 28                27
Average glacier area      km2                           1.05             0.62                  1.07               0.12              1.00
*includes area of not glaciated sub-basins




                                  Figure 12.2: Distribution of glaciers in the Yangtze basin




                                                                                                                                           109
                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



         Figure 12.3: Glacier number, area, and                                             Figure 12.4: Percentage of glacier number, area,
       estimated ice reserves in the Yangtze basin                                             and estimated ice reserves in the different
                                                                                                glacier size classes in the Yangtze basin




      Table 12.2: Glacier area classes in the Yangtze basin

      Area       Area                Number                            Area                           Estimated ice reserves         Mean area
      class      (km2)                                                                                                               per glacier
                                     Total            %                km2              %             km3            %               km2
      1                    ≤ 0.5             1,113            67.0            205.23           12.4          3.952             3.3          0.18
      2                0.51-1.00              232           14.07             164.45            9.9          4.986             4.1          0.71
      3                1.01-5.00              256             15.4            532.10           32.1         26.494        21.8              2.08
      4            5.01-10.00                  33              2.0            229.04           13.8         17.984        14.8              6.94
      5                  ≥10.00                27              1.6            529.03           31.9         67.979        56.0             19.59
                             Total           1,661             100           1,659.85           100     121.395            100              1.00

      Glacier elevation

      The highest glacier elevation was 6,270 masl and the
      lowest 2,972 masl, both in the Minjiang basin (Table                                  Figure 12.5: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
      12.1). The one glacier in the Jialing basin had an                                                 in the Yangtze basin
      elevation range of less than 100 m.

      Glacier aspect

      Figure 12.5 shows the percentage of glaciers with
      different aspects and mean slope. Close to 32% of the
      glaciers had a north aspect, and 26% a northeast aspect
      Only a few glaciers had more south facing aspects.

      Slope

      The mean slope of almost all the glaciers in the basin
      ranged from 10° to 60°, with slopes of 20° to 30° most
      common (Figure 12.5). A few glaciers in the Minjiang
      basin had slopes above 60°. The mean slopes of
      glaciers in the basins ranged from 25° to 29°, with an
      overall average of 27°.

110
                                                               13 Yellow River Basin




13 Yellow River Basin


The Yellow River (Hwang Ho) is the second-longest river in China with an estimated length of close to 5,500
kilometres. The river originates in the Bayan Har mountains in Qinghai Province in western China, and flows through
nine provinces in China before emptying into the Bohai Sea. The Yellow River basin extends 1,900 km from east to
west and 1,100 km from north to south. The total basin area is 1,073,168 km2 of which 250,540 km2 lies within
the HKH region (Figure 13.1).

Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

The HKH part of the Yellow River major basin has two basins, the Upper reaches (5J3) and Datong (5J4). The basins
are divided into three third level tributary sub-basins with the codes 5J31, 5J32, and 5J42 (Table 13.1). The glaciers
in the basin are found near the source in the Anyemaqen range in the east Kunlun Mountains and along a tributary
rising in the Lenglong range in the eastern Qilian mountains (Figure 13.2). The distribution and characteristics of the
glaciers in each basin are summarised in Table 13.1.

Number, area, and ice reserves

The Yellow River basin is not heavily glaciated (Figure 13.2); the 189 glaciers had a total area of 137 km2 and
estimated ice reserves of approximately 9.2 km3. The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the two
basins are shown in Figure 13.3. The two basins had similar numbers of glaciers, but the glaciated area of the Upper




                               Figure 13.1: Yellow River basin and drainage system




                                                                                                                          111
                     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



      reaches (5J3) was much higher (108 km2) than that in the Datong (5J4) (30 km2) as were the estimated ice reserves
      (8.3 and 0.9 km3, respectively). The largest glacier, with an area of 21 km2, was also located in the Upper reaches
      basin. The mean glacier area in the Upper reaches basin was 1.16 km2, and in the Datong basin 0.31 km2.

      Glacier area classes

      The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are summarised in Table 13.2
      and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 13.4. The majority of the glaciers, 142 or 75% of the total, were
      in class 1 (≤0.5 km2), but together contributed only about 15% of the glacier area and just under 4% of the ice


       Table 13.1: Glacier characteristics in the Yellow River basin (5J)

                                                                     Basin
       Parameter                     Units                           Upper reaches (5J3)        Datong (5J4)            Yellow River
       Basin area within HKH         km2                                             168,419                   58,428                  250,540*
       Latitude                      degrees                                      33.29-35.99            36.01-38.25              33.29-39.25
       Longitude                     degrees                                     99.37-101.13           98.61-101.87            98.61-101.87
       Number of glaciers            unit                                                 93                      96                       189
       Total glacier area            km2                                              107.87                    29.56                    137.43
       Largest glacier area          km2                                               20.82                     2.29                     20.82
       Total ice reserves            km3                                               8.333                    0.906                     9.239
       Highest elevation             masl                                              5,710                    5,033                     5,710
       Lowest elevation              masl                                              4,442                    4,151                     4,151
       Mean glacier slope            degrees                                              28                      25                        26
       Average glacier area          km2                                                1.16                     0.31                      0.73
       * includes non-glaciated sub-basins




                                            Figure 13.2: Glacier distribution in the Yellow River basin




112
                                                                        13 Yellow River Basin

Figure 13.3: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice                          Figure 13.4: Percentage of glacier number, area,
   reserves in the basins of the Yellow River basin                           and estimated ice reserves in the different glacier
                                                                                    size classes in the Yellow River basin




    Table 13.2: Glacier area classes in the Yellow River basin

    Area       Area                   Number                    Area                            Estimated ice reserves    Mean area
    class      (km2)                                                                                                      per glacier
                                      Total         %           km2            %                km3           %           km2
    1                       ≤ 0.5             142        75.1         20.91           15.2            0.362         3.9          0.15
    2                   0.51-1.00              19       10.15         13.49             9.8           0.395         4.3          0.71
    3                   1.01-5.00              24        12.7         46.28           33.7            2.188        23.7          1.93
    4                  5.01-10.00               1         0.5          5.40             3.9           0.375         4.1          5.40
    5                     ≥10.00                3         1.6         51.36           37.4            5.919        64.1         17.12
                              Total           189        100      137.43               100            9.239         100          0.73


   reserves. A further 23% of the glaciers were in class
   2 or 3, covering 43% of the glaciated area and
   containing 28% of the ice reserves. The 3 glaciers in
                                                                                 Figure 13.5: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
   class 5, less than 2% of the total, covered 51% of the
                                                                                            in the Yellow River basin
   area and contained 64% of the basin’s ice reserves.
   The average area per glacier overall was 0.73 km2.

   Glacier elevation

   The highest glacier elevation was 5,710 masl in the
   Upper reaches basin and the lowest 4,151 masl in
   the Datong basin (Table 13.1).

   Glacier aspect

   Figure 13.5 shows the percentage of glaciers with
   different aspects and mean slope. Close to 43% of
   the glaciers had a north aspect, and 32% a northeast
   aspect. Less than 1% faced south or southeast.


                                                                                                                                        113
                 The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



      Slope

      About 60% of the glaciers had a mean slope of 20° to 30°, 27% slopes of 30° to 40° (Figure 13.5), and 12%
      slopes of 10° to 20°. The average slope of glaciers in the Upper reaches basin was higher than in the Datong basin
      (28° and 25° respectively, Table 13.1).




114
                                                                14 Tarim Interior Basin




14 Tarim Interior Basin


The Tarim river is the principal river of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region in western China and the longest
inland river in the country. It gives its name to the great Tarim basin (5Y6) between the Tian Shan and Kunlun
mountain systems of Central Asia (the northern edge of the Tibetan Plateau), which extends from 34.634° to
43.352° N latitude and 73.634° to 91.112° E longitude (Figure 14.1). The Tarim river is formed after the
confluence of the Aksu river flowing from the north and the Yarkand river coming from the southwest, close to Aral
City in western Xinjiang. A third river, the Khotan, reaches the same junction area from the south but is usually dry at
this location as it has to cross through the Taklamakan Desert. The Tarim flows in an eastward direction around the
northern edge of the Taklamakan Desert, where it is joined by a further tributary, the Muzat river from the north. Of
these four rivers (Aksu, Yarkand, Khotan, and Muzart) only the Aksu flows into the Tarim year-round (Aizen and Aizen
1998). It is the most important tributary of the river, supplying 70-80 percent of its water volume. The Tarim basin has
a total area of 929,003 km2, of which only 26,729 km2 lies within the the HKH region.

Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

The Tarim River basin is elliptical with the long axis lying more or less east-west. The basin covers a large area of
which only a small part lies within the HKH region. This part has around 0.09% glacier cover concentrated on the
northern and southern flank and mapped in two sub-basins: I and II (Figure 14.1). The distribution and characteristics




  Figure 14.1: The Tarim Interior basin and distribution of glaciers within the part lying within the HKH region




      I




                                                                                                                         115
                     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



      of the glaciers in each sub-basin are summarised                                    Figure 14.2: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice
      in Table 14.1. CI/DC and morphological                                                       reserves in the Tarim Interior basin
      differentiation, and hypsography were only analysed
      for the glaciers in sub-basin I; sub-basin II is located
      in China and this information is not yet available for
      these glaciers.

      Number, area, and ice reserves

      A total of 1,091 glaciers were identified in the
      basin with an area of 2,310 km2 and estimated
      ice reserves of 379 km3 (Table 14.1). The number,
      area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the
      sub-basins are shown in Figure 14.2. Sub-basin II
      had the greatest number of glaciers, glaciated area,
      and estimated ice reserves. The largest glacier in the
      basin was GLIMS ID G080880E35286N located at
      35.286° N latitude and 80.880° E longitude in sub-
      basin II at an elevation of 6,144 to 5,341 masl and
      with an area of 239 km2 and estimated ice reserves
      of 86 km3.

      Glacier area classes

      The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in the different size classes are summarised in Table 14.2
      and shown as a percentage of the total in Figure 14.3. The majority of glaciers were in the smallest class (694, or
      64%); and the least number in class 4 (24 or 2%). The class 1 glaciers contributed less than 6% of the glacier area
      and less than 1% of the ice reserves. The 37 glaciers in class 5 (≥10 km2) were only 3% of the total number, but
      had 66% of the total area and contained 90% of the estimated ice reserves. The mean glacier area in the basin was
      2.12 km2.


       Table 14.1: Glacier characteristics in the Tarim Interior basin within the HKH

       Parameter                               Units                 Sub-basin                                           Tarim
                                                                     I                         II*
       Basin area                              km2                                    1,955                  24,774                      26,729
       Latitude                                degrees                           36.07-36.75           34.74-36.30                 34.74-36.75
       Longitude                               degrees                           75.56-76.01           78.18-86.82                 75.56-86.82
       Number of glaciers                      unit                                     278                      813                       1,091
       CI glacier area                         km2                                   516.95                       NA                          NA
       DC glacier area                         km2                                    32.00                       NA                          NA
       Total glacier area                      km2                                   548.93                1,761.32                    2,310.26
       Largest glacier area                    km2                                   166.42                  239.23                      239.23
       Total ice reserves                      km3                                    71.34                  307.30                      378.64
       Highest elevation                       masl                                   6,462                    6,399                       6,462
       Lowest elevation                        masl                                   3,940                    5,127                       3,940
       CI glacier elevation                    masl                              4,277-6,462                      NA                          NA
       DC glacier elevation                    masl                              3,940-5,235                      NA                          NA
      Mean CI glacier slope                    degrees                                   27          26 (all glaciers)           27 (all glaciers)
      Mean DC glacier slope                    degrees                                   10                       NA                          NA
      CI-DC area ratio                         unit                                   16.16                       NA                          NA
      Average glacier area                     km2                                     1.97                     2.17                        2.12
      *lies in China, no CI/DC differentiation


116
                                                                          14 Tarim Interior Basin



 Glacier elevation

 The highest glacier elevation was 6,462 masl and the lowest 3,940 masl both in sub-basin I. In sub-basin I, CI
 glaciers were found from 6,462 to 4,277 masl and DC glaciers from 5,235 to 3,940 masl (glaciers in sub-basin II
 not analysed).

 Glacier aspect

 Figure 14.4 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope The majority of glaciers had a
 northeast (30%) or north (27%) aspect, with around 10% each facing east, southeast, and south.

 Slope

 The mean slopes of the glaciers ranged from 10° to 50°, with slopes of 20° to 30° most common, followed by
 slopes of 30° to 40°. Only a very few glaciers had slopes of less than 10° or greater than 40° (Figure 14.4).

 The mean slope of CI and DC glaciers in sub-basin I was 27° and 10°, respectively; the average mean slope of the
 glaciers in the basin was 27° (Table 14.1).

 Morphological glacier type

 The morphological classification of glaciers in Tarim Interior sub-basin I is summarised in Table 14.3; the comparative
 distribution by number, area, and estimated ice reserves is shown graphically in Figure 14.5.

 Table 14.2: Glacier area classes in the Tarim Interior basin

 Area class Area                Number                     Area                                 Estimated ice reserves         Mean area
            (km2)                                                                                                              per glacier
                                Total           %          km2                %                 km3            %               km2
 1                    ≤ 0.5              694        63.6         131.67                5.7             2.610             0.7          0.19
 2                0.51-1.00              159        14.6         111.37                4.8             3.446             0.9          0.70
 3                1.01-5.00              177        16.2         370.79               16.1            19.058             5.0          2.09
 4            5.01-10.00                  24         2.2         167.61                7.3            13.594             3.6          6.98
 5                  ≥10.00                37         3.4    1,528.82                  66.2          339.930        89.78             41.32
                        Total           1,091       100     2,310.26                   100            378.64         100              2.12




Figure 14.3: Percentage of glacier number, area,                                  Figure 14.4: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
   and estimated ice reserves in the different                                              in the Tarim Interior basin
  glacier size classes in the Tarim Interior basin




                                                                                                                                             117
                           The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



 Figure 14.5: Comparative distribution of different glacier                                             Figure 14.6: Area-altitude distribution of
    types in Tarim Interior basin by number, area, and                                                       glaciers in Tarim Interior basin
                  estimated ice reserves




glaciers in basin II not analysed                                                           glaciers in basin II not analysed




           Table 14.3: Morphological classification of glaciers in Tarim Interior sub-basin*

           Glacier type                         Number                           Area                            Estimated ice reserves         Mean area
                                                                                                                                                per glacier
                                                Total           %                km2            %                km3            %               km2
                        Miscellaneous                     0              0.0             0.00            0.0           0.000              0.0          0.0
                        Ice apron                        99             35.6            14.34            2.6           0.310              0.4         0.14

             Mountain
                        Cirque                            0              0.0             0.00            0.0           0.000              0.0          0.0
                        Niche                             8              2.9             0.80            0.1           0.013         0.02             0.10
                        Basin                            87             31.3            37.41            6.8           1.314              1.8         0.43
           Valley       Trough                           84             30.2           496.38           90.4         69.710          97.7             5.91
                                        Total           278              100           548.93            100           71.343         100             1.97
           *glaciers in sub-basin II not analysed



          Close to 67% of the glaciers were mountain type, the majority of them ice apron type (36%) or mountain basin type
          (31%), but they covered only 10% of the glaciated area and contained a little more than 2% of the estimated ice
          reserves. The 84 valley glaciers represented only 30% of the total number, but covered 90% of the glaciated area
          and contained 98% of the ice reserves.

          Clean-ice and debris-covered glaciers

          CI and. DC type glaciers were differentiated in sub-basin I. DC glacier components covered an area of 32 km2, less
          than 6% of the total area (Table 14.1).

          Hypsography

          The glacier area-altitude distribution in sub-basin I is shown in Figure 14.6. Altogether 99% of the glacier area lay
          between 4,500 masl and 6,100 masl. The highest glacier concentration was 74.63 km2 (14%), at an elevation of
          5,300 to 5,400 masl.

    118
                                                               15 Eastern Asian Qinghai-Tibetan Interior Basin




15 Eastern Asian Qinghai-Tibetan
   Interior Basins


In addition to the ten major river basins, the HKH region contains a huge interior (endhoreic) basin in the central
and northern part of the region that retains water without allowing outflow to other water bodies. The basin extends
from 28.18° to 39.32° N latitude and 78.29° to 101.16°E longitude and covers an area of 909,824 km2. It is
divided into two parts, the Qinghai-Tibetan Interior and Eastern Asian Interior, linked by a small corridor
(Figure 15.1).

Mapping and Inventory of Glaciers

The glaciated part of the interior basin extends from 29.69° to 39.28° N latitude and 78.31° to 100.54° E
longitude. The distribution and characteristics of the glaciers in each part are summarised in Table 15.1. The basin
lies entirely in China, thus descriptions of the typology, morphological classification, and hypsography are not yet
available.




                            Figure 15.1: The glaciers in the HKH region interior basin




                                                                                                                       119
                     The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



       Table 15.1: Glacier characteristics in the HKH region interior basin

       Items                          Units                          Interior basin                                     Interior basin
                                                                     Qinghai-Tibetan            Eastern-Asian
       Basin area                     km2                                             629,378               280,446                      909,824
       Latitude                       degrees                                    29.69-36.75             35.40-39.28              29.69-39.28
       Longitude                      degrees                                    78.31-93.06            90.54-100.54             78.31-100.54
       Number of glaciers             unit                                              5,033                   2,318                      7,351
       Total glacier area             km2                                          5,493.32                 2,041.32                 7,534.64
       Largest glacier area           km2                                               69.12                   83.94                      83.94
       Total ice reserves             km3                                             423.893               130.207                        563.1
       Highest elevation              masl                                              6,609                   6,052                      6,609
       Lowest elevation               masl                                              4,930                   3,994                      3,994
       Mean glacier slope             degree                                              23                      25                         24
       Average glacier area           km2                                                1.09                    0.88                       1.02
       No information on CI and DC glaciers



      Number, area, and ice reserves

      The interior basin had a total of 7,351 glaciers with a total area of 7,535 km2 and estimated ice reserves of
      563 km3 (Table 15.1).

      The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of glaciers in each part of the interior basin are shown in Figure 15.2.
      The Qinghai-Tibetan basin had the most glaciers (5,033), largest glaciated area (5,493.32 km2), and highest
      estimated ice reserves (433 km3). The largest glacier in this basin was GLIMS ID: G085873E34310N (5Z63_42)
      with an area of 69 km2 and estimated ice reserves of 14 km3, and extending from 5,988 to 5,462 masl. The
      largest individual glacier overall was GLIMS ID G091021E36065N (5Y54_324) in the Eastern Asian basin with
      an area of 84 km2 and estimated ice reserves of 19 km3, and extending from 5,569 to 4,858 masl. The average
      glacier size in the Qinghai-Tibetan basin was 1.09 km2, and in the Eastern Asian basin 0.88 km2.

      Glacier area classes

      The number, area, and estimated ice reserves of
      glaciers in the different size classes are summarised in
      Table 15.2 and shown as a percentage of the total                                    Figure 15.2: Glacier number, area, and estimated ice
      in Figure 15.3. The majority of glaciers were in the                                     reserves in the two parts of the interior basin
      smallest class (4,894, or 67%); and the least in class
      5 (109 or 1.5%). The class 1 glaciers contributed
      only 11% of the glacier area and less than 3% of the
      ice reserves. The large class 5 glaciers (more than
      10 km2) were less than 2% of the total number, had
      the second highest total area (30% of the total) and
      contained 54% of the ice reserves.

      Glacier elevation

      The highest glacier elevation was 6,609 masl in the
      Qinghai-Tibetan basin and the lowest 3,994 masl in
      the Eastern-Asian basin, with the majority of glaciers
      lying between 5000 and 6500 masl (Table 15.1).




120
                                                                        15 Eastern Asian Qinghai-Tibetan Interior Basin



Figure 15.3: Percentage of glacier number, area, and                           Figure 15.4: Aspect and mean slope of glaciers
  estimated ice reserves in the different glacier size                                       in the interior basin
             classes in the interior basin




    Table 15.2: Glacier area classes in the HKH region interior basin

    Area class                                                                                                                   Mean area
                 Area                   Number                   Area                           Estimated ice reserves
                                                                                                                                 per glacier
                 (km2)
                                        Total         %          km2           %                km3              %               km2
    1                         ≤ 0.5        4,894          66.6    844.17             11.2          15.991                  2.8         0.17
    2                     0.51-1.00        1,000          13.6    708.34               9.4         21.166                  3.8         0.71
    3                     1.01-5.00        1,167          15.9   2,506.02            33.3        125.600                  22.3         2.15
    4                    5.01-10.00             181        2.5   1,239.36            16.5          96.455                 17.1         6.85
    5                       ≥10.00              109        1.5   2,236.76            29.7        303.889                  54.1      20.52
                                Total       7,351         100    7,534.64              100        563.100                 100          1.02


   Aspect

   Figure 15.4 shows the percentage of glaciers with different aspects and mean slope. More than 43% of glaciers
   had a north aspect, close to 30% a northeast aspect, and 12% a northwest aspect. The largest glaciers in both parts
   of the interior basin faced east.

   Slope

   The mean slope of most of the glaciers ranged from 10° to 40°, with slopes of 20° to 30° most common, followed
   by slopes of 30° to 40° and 10° to 20° (Figure 15.4). Less than 15% of glaciers had slopes of less than 10° and
   greater than 40°. The average slope of glaciers in the basin was 24°, slightly higher in the Eastern Asian basins
   (25°) and slightly lower in the Qinghai-Tibetan basin (23°). The mean slope of the largest glacier in the Eastern
   Asian basins was 14° and in the Qinghai-Tibetan basin 11°.




                                                                                                                                               121
                  The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




      Conclusion


      The HKH Glacier Inventory

      Ten major Asian rivers – the Amu Darya, Indus, Ganges, Brahmaputra, Irrawaddy, Salween, Mekong, Yangtze,
      Yellow and Tarim – have their source in the glaciers of the HKH region. Glaciers play an important role in sustaining
      the perennial water supply to downstream areas, in storing water, and in climate processes. Information about them
      is important for assessing regional water resources, hazard management applications, and climate change impact
      studies. The present study provides the first comprehensive inventory of glaciers for the entire HKH region prepared
      using a common methodology and presented at the river basin level. This seems likely to be the first report with
      details of glaciers in Myanmar.

      A consistent semi-automated methodology based on remote sensing was used, with manual corrections carried
      out by a team of remote sensing specialists, glaciologists, and geologists. Extensive use was made of medium
      resolution Landsat ETM+ imagery, mostly from around the year 2005 and high resolution images of Google Earth,
      in combination with SRTM digital elevation models. A systematic approach was followed and for each glacier a set
      of parameters was derived consistent with the international guidelines formulated by the World Glacier Monitoring
      Service. Within each basin, glaciers were analysed for area, elevation range, slope, and aspect, and in addition
      debris cover, morphology, and hypsometry, except for glaciers in China. Efforts are underway to complete this part
      of the classification in collaboration with the Chinese Glacier Inventory.

      Status of Glaciers in the HKH Region

      Number and distribution

      A total of 54,000 individual glaciers were identified with an overall area of 60,000 km2, and an estimated
      6,000 km3 of ice reserves. In total, 1.4% of the HKH region is glaciated, but the total ice reserves are equal to
      roughly three times the annual precipitation over the entire HKH region (Bookhagen and Burbank 2006; Immerzeel
      et al. 2009).The average size of individual glaciers was relatively small (1.1 km2), but most of the ice reserves are
      found in the larger glaciers as a result of the non-linear volume-area relationship. The largest individual glacier was
      the Siachen glacier in the Karakoram mountains in the Indus basin with a total area of 926 km2.

      The distribution of glaciers across the region is shown in Figure 1 and the level of glaciation in individual basins in
      Figure 2. There was a large variation in the glaciated areas found within each basin with the greatest proportions in
      the Indus (3.8% of the total basin area within the HKH region), Brahmaputra (3.2% of the total basin area within the
      HKH region), and Ganges basins (3.7% of the total basin area within the HKH region) (Figures 1 and 2).

      Summary of characteristics

      The overall results for individual parameters across the region are summarised in Table 1.

      Altogether 28,500 glaciers with a glaciated area of 32,000 km2 were analysed in terms of debris cover or clean-
      ice type. Overall 9.7% of the total glacier area was debris-covered, with higher values of 12.6% and 9.3% in the
      Ganges and Indus basins respectively. The debris-covered glaciers are mostly valley glaciers with a thick debris
      cover on the glacier tongue. They had an average slope of around 12°, whereas clean-ice glaciers were much
      steeper with average slopes of around 25°. The debris cover plays an important role as it has an insulating effect
      and reduces melting rates.



122
                                                              Conclusion



           Figure 1: Distribution of glaciers in the ten major river basins of the Hindu Kush-Himalayas




There was a large variation in glacier elevation range, with the lowest glacier terminus identified at 2,409 masl in
the Indus basin and the highest at 8,806 masl in the Koshi basin. Overall, the largest glaciated area concentration
in the HKH was found at altitudes of 5,000-6,000 masl. The elevation range, and more specifically the hypsometric
curves, are very important as they largely determine how sensitive glaciers are to changes in temperature. This study
provides detailed hypsometric curves at the sub-basin level for all the parts of the major river basins outside the
region in China.

Making the information available

The data generated in this study including the attribute
information is being made publically available and                         Figure 2: Percentage of glaciated area within
can be used by decision makers, scientists, and                               the HKH part of the major river basins
governments in different fields of application. The
data are provided through a web portal accessible
at http://geoportal.icimod.org/HKHGlacier/ that
allows easy access, spatial sub-setting, and online
analysis.

Future developments

This inventory can now serve as a baseline and
will be continuously updated during the coming
years with a particular focus on quantifying changes
and especially any impact of climate change. It
is hoped that this open approach and the use of
a transparent methodology will help in avoiding
future misunderstandings related to the Hindu Kush-
Himalayan glaciers.

                                                                                                                        123
124




      Table 1: Glacier characteristics in the basins of the HKH region
      Parameter                Units      Basin                                                                                                                                                          HKH

                                          Amu Darya Indus              Ganges        Brahmaputra Irrawaddy        Salween     Mekong       Yangtze        Yellow          Tarim          Interior
      Basin area total         km2           645,726       1,116,086   1,001,019        528,079       426,501      363,778      841,322    2,065,763      1,073,168         929,003                 NA   8,990,445
      Basin area in HKH        km2           166,686        555,450      244,806        432,480       202,745      211,122      138,876      565,102        250,540          26,729         909,824      3,705,721
      Latitude minimum         degrees            34.58       30.45         27.53          27.49         28.06        28.38       28.30         28.21         33.29           34.74            29.69           27.49
      Latitude maximum         degrees            38.35       37.08         31.42          31.03         28.77        32.76       33.73         35.78         38.25           36.75            39.28           39.28
      Longitude minimum        degrees            67.63       69.36         77.98          82.03         97.32        91.50       94.15         90.56         98.61           75.56            78.31           67.63
      Longitude maximum        degrees            74.88       81.65          88.7          97.76         98.17        98.71       98.76       103.89         101.87           86.82          100.54        103.89
      Number of glaciers       unit               3,277      18,495         7,963         11,497           133        2,113         482         1,661              189        1,091            7,351       54,252
      CI glacier area          km2          2,405.59      18,631.04*   5,621.68*      1,185.65*          35.46          NA           NA           NA                NA      516.95*                 NA           NA
      DC glacier area          km2            160.59         1,970*      809.92*        147.52*             0.0         NA           NA           NA                NA      32.00 *                 NA           NA
      Total glacier area       km2          2,566.18       21,192.67    9,011.53      14,019.84          35.46    1,351.76       234.61     1,659.85         137.43        2,310.26        7,534.64      60,054.23
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region




      Largest glacier area     km2                39.72      925.93       176.76          204.36          2.91        40.06         9.76        54.59         20.82          239.23            83.94            926
      Total ice reserves       km3            162.61        2,696.05      793.53        1,302.63          1.29        87.69       10.68       121.40               9.24      378.64            563.1      6,126.85
      Highest elevation        masl               7,213       8,566         8,806          8,331         5,695        6,471       6,361         6,270         5,710           6,462            6,609           8,806
      Lowest elevation         masl               3,131       2,409         3,273          2,435         4,256        3,786       2,891         2,972         4,151           3,940            3,994           2,409
      CI elevation minimum*    masl               3,415       2,723         3,610          3,707         4,256          NA           NA           NA                NA            4277              NA           NA
      CI elevation maximum*    masl               7,213       8,566         8,806          8,331         5,695          NA           NA           NA                NA            6462              NA           NA
      DC elevation minimum*    masl               3,131       2,409         3,273          3,882            NA          NA           NA           NA                NA            3940              NA           NA
      DC elevation maximum*    masl               5,466       5,913         6,009          5,828            NA          NA           NA           NA                NA            5235              NA           NA
      Mean CI glacier slope*   degrees              25            25            28            25            25          NA           NA           NA                NA              27              NA           NA
      Mean DC glacier slope* degrees                12            10            13            13            NA          NA           NA           NA                NA              10              NA           NA
      Mean slope               degrees              24            24            28            25            25           25           26             27             26             27               24           25
      Average glacier area     km2                 0.78         1.15         1.13           1.22          0.27         0.64         0.49         1.00              0.73           2.12          1.02            1.11
      Note: Based on UTM, WGS 84 projection. HKH area= 4,192,446 km2; ten basins area in HKH region=2,795,898 km2 (excluding interior basin), part of HKH area is not included in either the ten basins or the
      interior
      * excluding glaciers in China, NA = not applicable (as not evaluated)
                                                                       References




References


Aizen, VB; Aizen EM (1998) ‘Estimation of glacial runoff to the Tarim river, Central Tien Shan.’ In Proceedings of International
   Symposium ‘WaterHead’98’, Merano, ITALY, IAHS Publication 248, pp191-199. Wallingford, UK: IAHS Press
Armstrong RL (2011) The glaciers of the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region – A summary of the science regarding glacier melt/retreat
   in the Himalayan, Hindu Kush, Karakoram, Pamir, and Tien Shan mountain ranges. Kathmandu, Nepal: ICIMOD
Bajracharya, SR; Mool, PK (2007) ‘Melting glaciers in the Himalaya.’ Mountain Forum Secretariat Bulletin 7(2): 5-6
Bajracharya, SR; Mool, PK; Shrestha, BR (2007) Impact of climate change on Himalayan glaciers and glacial lakes: Case
    studies on GLOF and associated hazards in Nepal and Bhutan. Kathmandu, Nepal: ICIMOD
Barnett, TP; Adam, JC; Lettenmaier, DP (2005) ‘Potential impacts of a warming climate on water availability in snow-dominated
   regions.’ Nature 438: 303-309
Bishop, MP; Barry, RG; Bush, ABG; Copeland, L; Dwyer, JL; Fountain, AG; Haeberli, W; Hall, DK; Kääb, A; Kargel, JS; Molina,
    BF; Olsenholler, JA; Paul, F; Raup, BH; Shroder, JF; Trabant, DC; Wessels, R (2004) ‘Global Land Ice Measurements from
    Space (GLIMS): Remote sensing and GIS investigations of the Earth’s cryosphere.’ Geocarto International 19(2): 57-85
Bolch, T; Buchroithner, MF; Peters J; Baessler, M; Bajracharya, S (2008) ‘Identification of glacier motion and potentially
    dangerous glacial lakes in the Mt. Everest region/Nepal using spaceborne imagery.’ Natural Hazards and Earth System
    Sciences 8: 1329-1340
Bookhagen, B; Burbank, DW (2006) ‘Topography, relief, and TRMM-derived rainfall variations along the Himalaya.’
   Geophysical Research Letters 33: 1-5
Chao-hai, L; Ya-feng, S; Wang, Z; Zi-chu, X (2000) ‘Glacier resources and their distributive characteristics in China: A review on
   Chinese Glacier Inventory.’ Journal of Glaciology and Geocryology 22 (2): 106-112
Dyhrenfurth, GO (1955) To the Third Pole: The history of the High Himalaya (1st edn). London, UK: Ex Libris, Werner Laurie
GSI (1999) Inventory of the Himalayan glaciers: A contribution to the International Hydrological Programme, Special Publication
   No 34. Calcutta, India: Geological Survey of India
Haeberli, W; Hoelzle, M (1995) ‘Application of inventory data for estimating characteristics of and regional climate-change
   effects on mountain glaciers: A pilot study with the European Alps.’ Annals of Glaciology 21: 206-212
Hewitt, K (2005) ‘The Karakoram anomaly? Glacier expansion and the ‘Elevation effect,’ Karakoram Himalaya.’ Mountain
  Research and Development 25(4): 332-340
Hewitt, K (2010) Understanding glacier changes. http://www.chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/3480 (accessed 30
  August 2011)
Huggel, C; Zgraggen-Oswald, S; Haeberli, W; Kääb, A; Polkvoj, A; Galushkin, I; Evans, SG (2005) ‘The 2002 rock/ice
   avalanche at Kolka/Karmadon, Russian Caucasus: assessment of extraordinary avalanche formation and mobility, and
   application of QuickBird satellite imagery.’ Natural Hazards and Earth System Science 5: 173-187
Immerzeel, WW; Droogers, P; De Jong, SM; Bierkens, M (2009) ‘Large-scale monitoring of snow cover and runoff simulation in
   Himalayan river basins using remote sensing.’ Remote Sensing of Environment 113: 40-49
IPCC (2001a) Climate change 2001: Technical summary, Contribution of Working Group I to the Third Assessment Report of the
   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
IPCC (2001b) Climate change 2001: Impacts, adaptation and vulnerability, Contribution of Working Group II to the Third
   Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
IPCC (2007) Climate change 2007: The physical science basis, Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment
   Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press
Ives, JD (1986) Glacier lake outburst floods and risk engineering in the Himalaya – a review of the Langmoche disaster, Khumbu
    Himal, 4 August 1985, Occasional Paper No 5. Kathmandu, Nepal: ICIMOD




                                                                                                                                     125
                   The Status of Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan Region



      Ives, JD; Shrestha, RB; Mool, PK (2010) Formation of glacial lakes in the Hindu Kush-Himalayas and GLOF risk assessment.
          Kathmandu: ICIMOD.
      Kääb, A; Wessels, R; Haeberli, W; Huggel, C; Kargel, JS; Khalsa, SJS (2003) ‘Rapid ASTER imaging facilitates timely
         assessment of glacier hazards and disasters.’ EOS, Transactions American Geophysical Union 84(13): 117-121
      Kargel, JS; Abrams, MJ; Bishop, MP; Bush, A; Hamilton, G; Jiskoot, H; Kääb, A; Kieffer, HH; Lee, EM; Paul, F; Rau, F; Raup, B;
         Shroder, JF; Soltesz, DL; Stearns, L; Wessels, R (2005) ‘Multispectral imaging contributions to Global Land Ice Measurements
         from Space.’ Remote Sensing of Environment 99: 187-219
      Kargel, JS; Furfaro, R; Kaser, G; Leonard, GJ; Fink, W; Huggel, C; Kääb, A; Raup, BH; Reynolds, JM; Zapata, ML (2010)
         ‘ASTER imaging and analysis of glacier hazards.’ In Ramachandran, B; Gillespie, A; Abrams, M (eds), Land remote sensing
         and global environmental change: NASA’S Earth Observing System, and the science of ASTER and MODIS, pp 325-374.
         New York, USA: Springer Verlag
      Kattelmann, R (2003) ‘Glacial lake outburst floods in the Nepal Himalaya: a manageable hazard?’ Natural Hazards 28(1):
          145-154
      Kulkami, AV (1991) ‘Glacier inventory in Himachal Pradesh using satellite data.’ Journal of Indian Society of Remote Sensing
          19(3): 195-203
      Kulkami, AV (1994) ‘A conceptual model to assess effect of climatic variations on distribution of Himalayan glaciers.’ In Global
          change studies: Scientific results from ISRO Geosphere Biosphere Programme (ISRO-GBP-SR-42-94), pp 322-326. Bangalore,
          India: Indian Space Research Organisation
      LIGG/WECS/NEA (1988) Report on first expedition to glaciers and glacier lakes in the Pumqu (Arun) and Poique (Bhote-Sun
         Kosi) river basins, Xizang (Tibet), China, Sino-Nepalese investigation of glacier lake outburst floods in the Himalaya. Beijing,
         China: Science Press
      Manley, WF (2008) ‘Geospatial inventory and analysis of glaciers: A case study for the eastern Alaska Range.’ In Williams, Jr,
        RS; and Ferrigno, JG (eds), Satellite image atlas of glaciers of the world: Glaciers of Alaska, USGS Professional Paper 1386-
        K, pp 424-439. Washington DC, USA: US Government Printing Office
      Mool, PK (1995) ‘Glacier lake outburst floods in Nepal.’ In Journal of Nepal Geological Society 11(special issue): 273-280
      Mool, PK; Bajracharya, SR; Joshi, SP (2001a) Inventory of glaciers, glacial lakes, and glacial lake outburst flood monitoring and
        early warning systems in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region: Nepal. Kathmandu, Nepal: ICIMOD
      Mool, PK; Wangda, D; Bajracharya, SR; Joshi, SP; Kunzang, K; Gurung, DR (2001b) Inventory of glaciers, glacial lakes, and
        glacial lake outburst flood monitoring and early warning system in the Hindu Kush-Himalayan region: Bhutan. Kathmandu,
        Nepal: ICIMOD
      Müller, F; Caflish, T; Müller, G (1977) Instructions for compilation and assemblage of data for a World Glacier Inventory. Zurich,
         Switzerland: Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Temporary Technical Secretariat for World Glacier Inventory
      Paul, F (2002) ‘Combined technologies allow rapid analysis of glacier changes.’ EOS, Transactions American Geophysical
         Union 83(23): 253-261
      Paul, F; Kääb A; Rott H; Shepherd, A; Strozzi, T; Volden, E (2009) ‘Globglacier: A new ESA project to map the world’s glaciers
         and ice caps from space.’ EARSeL eProceedings 8: 11-25
      Quincey, DJ; Richardson, SD; Luckman, A; Lucas, RM; Reynolds, JM; Hambrey, MJ; Glasser, NF (2007) ‘Early recognition of
         glacial lake hazards in the Himalaya using remote sensing datasets.’ Global and Planetary Change 56(1-2): 137-152
      Racoviteanu, AE; Pau, lF; Raup, B; Khalsa, SJS; Armstrong, R (2009) ‘Challenges and recommendations in mapping of glacier
         parameters from space: Results of the 2008 Global Land Ice Measurements from Space (GLIMS) workshop, Boulder,
         Colorado, USA.’ Annals of Glaciology 50(53): 53-69
      Raina, VK; Srivastava, D (2008) Glacier atlas of India. Bangalore, India: Geological Society of India
      Rau, F; Mauz, F; Vogt, S; Khalsa, SJS; Raup, B (2005) Illustrated GLIMS glacier classification manual: Glacier classification
         guidance for the GLIMS glacier inventory, Version 1.0, 2005-02-10. http://www.glims.org/MapsAndDocs/assets/GLIMS_
         Glacier-Classification-Manual_V1_2005-02-10.pdf (accessed 30 August 2011)
      Raup, B; Kääb, A; Kargel, JS; Bishop, MP; Hamilton, G; Lee, E; Paul, F; Rau, F; Soltesz, D; Khalsa, SJS; Beedle M; Helm, C
         (2007a) ‘Remote sensing and GIS technology in the Global Land Ice Measurements from Space (GLIMS) Project.’ Computers
         and Geoscience 33: 104-125
      Raup, B; Racoviteanu, A; Khalsa, SJS; Helm, C; Armstrong, R; Arnaud, Y (2007b) ‘The GLIMS Geospatial Glacier Database: A
         new tool for studying glacier change.’ Global and Planetary Change 56(1-2): 101-110




126
                                                                    References



Reynolds, JM (1998) ‘High-altitude glacial lake hazard assessment and mitigation: a Himalayan perspective.’ In Maund, JG;
   Eddleston, M (eds), Geohazards in engineering geology, GSL Special Publication 15, pp 25-34. London, UK: Geological
   Society
Richardson, SD; Reynolds, JM (2000) ‘An overview of glacial hazards in the Himalayas.’ Quaternary International, 65/66(1):
    31-47
Rivera A; Casassa, G; Bamber, J; Kääb, A (2005) ‘Ice-elevation changes of Glacier Chico, southern Patagonia, using ASTER
    DEMs, aerial photographs and GPS data.’ Journal of Glaciology 51(172): 105-112
Scherler,D; Bookhagen, B; Strecker,MR (2011) Spatially variable response of Himalayan glaciers to climate change affected by
   debris cover. Nat. Geosci. 4:156-159,doi:10.1038/NGEO1068, 2572,2583
Shi, Y; Liu, S; Ye, B; Liu, C; Wang, Z (eds) (2008) Concise glacier inventory of China. Shanghai, China: Shanghai Popular
    Science Press
Shrestha, AB; Wake, CP; Mayewski, PA; Dibb, JE (1999) ‘Maximum temperature trends in the Himalaya and its vicinity: An
    analysis based on temperature records from Nepal for the period 1971-94.’ Journal of Climate 12: 2775-2767
Storey, J; Scaramuzza, P; Schmidt, G (2005) Landsat 7 scan line corrector-off gap filled product development. Paper presented
    at the Pecora 16 Conference, 23-27 October 2005, Sioux Falls, South Dakota, USA
Thomas, RH; Rignot, E; Kanagaratnam, P; Krabill, W; Casassa, G (2004) ‘Force perturbation analysis of Pine Island Glacier
   suggests cause for recent acceleration.’ Annals of Glaciology 39:133-138
TTS (1978) Instructions for compilation and assemblage of data for a World Glacier Inventory. Supplement: Identification/glacier
   number. Zurich, Switzerland: Temporary Technical Secretariat for World Glacier Inventory
Wessels, R; Kargel, JS; Kieffer, HH (2002) ‘ASTER measurement of supraglacial lakes in the Mount Everest region of the
  Himalaya.’ Annals of Glaciology 34: 399-408
WGMS (1989) World glacier inventory - Status 1988. Haeberli, W; Bösch, H; Scherler, K; Østrem, G; Wallén, CC (eds).
  Zurich, Switzerland: IAHS (ICSI) / UNEP / UNESCO, World Glacier Monitoring Service
Yamada, T (1998) Glacier lake and its outburst flood in the Nepal Himalaya, Monograph 1. Tokyo, Japan: Japanese Society of
   Snow and Ice, Data Center for Glacier Research
Yamada, T (2000) ‘Glacier lake outburst floods in Nepal.’ Seppyo 62(2): 137-147 (in Japanese with English summary)
Yamada, T; Sharma, CK (1993) ‘Glacier lakes and outburst floods in the Nepal Himalaya.’ In Proceedings of International
   Symposium Snow and Glacier Hydrology, Kathmandu, 1992, IAHS Publication 218, pp319-330. Wallingford, UK: IAHS
   Press
Zimmermann, M; Bischel, M; Kienholz, H (1986) ‘Mountain hazards mapping in the Khumbu Himal, Nepal, with prototype
   map, scale 1:50,000.’ Mountain Research and Development 6(1): 29-40




                                                                                                                                   127
About ICIMOD

The International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development, ICIMOD, is a regional knowledge development
and learning centre serving the eight regional member countries of the Hindu Kush-Himalayas – Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Bhutan, China, India, Myanmar, Nepal, and Pakistan – and based in Kathmandu, Nepal.
Globalisation and climate change have an increasing influence on the stability of fragile mountain ecosystems
and the livelihoods of mountain people. ICIMOD aims to assist mountain people to understand these changes,
adapt to them, and make the most of new opportunities, while addressing upstream-downstream issues. We
support regional transboundary programmes through partnership with regional partner institutions, facilitate the
exchange of experience, and serve as a regional knowledge hub. We strengthen networking among regional
and global centres of excellence. Overall, we are working to develop an economically and environmentally
sound mountain ecosystem to improve the living standards of mountain populations and to sustain vital
ecosystem services for the billions of people living downstream – now, and for the future.
International Centre for Integrated Mountain Development
GPO Box 3226, Kathmandu, Nepal
Tel +977-1-5003222 Fax +977-1-5003299
Email info@icimod.org Web www.icimod.org

ISBN 978 92 9115 215 5
