Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Remote Sensing of Environment
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/rse

A new geostatistical approach for ﬁlling gaps in Landsat ETM+ SLC-off images
Xiaolin Zhu a, b, Desheng Liu b, c,⁎, Jin Chen a
a

State Key Laboratory of Earth Surface Processes and Resource Ecology, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, China
Department of Geography, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
c
Department of Statistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA
b

a r t i c l e

i n f o

Article history:
Received 18 December 2011
Received in revised form 17 April 2012
Accepted 22 April 2012
Available online xxxx
Keywords:
Landsat ETM+
SLC-off
Gap ﬁlling
Geostatistical
Kriging

a b s t r a c t
Since the failure of scan-line corrector (SLC) of the Landsat 7 Enhanced Thermal Mapper Plus (ETM+) sensor,
a number of methods have been developed to ﬁll the un-scanned gaps in ETM+ images. Unfortunately, the
quality of the images ﬁlled by most of these existing methods is still not satisfactory, particularly in
heterogeneous regions. Recently, a Neighborhood Similar Pixel Interpolator (NSPI) was developed that can
accurately ﬁll gaps in SLC-off images even in heterogeneous regions. However, the NSPI method is a type
of deterministic interpolation approach that sets its weight parameters empirically and cannot provide
statistical uncertainty of prediction. This study proposes a new gap-ﬁlling method called Geostatistical
Neighborhood Similar Pixel Interpolator (GNSPI) by improving the NSPI method using geostatistical theory.
The simulation study shows that: compared with previous geostatistical methods, the image ﬁlled by GNSPI
has fewer striping effects; compared with NSPI, GNSPI is less empirical in its weight parameters and can
provide uncertainty of prediction. More importantly, it can generate more accurate results than NSPI,
especially when there is a long time interval between the input auxiliary image and the target SLC-off image.
© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Since its ﬁrst launch in 1972, Landsat satellite series has been
continuously collecting images of the Earth from space (Goward
et al., 2006). This longest archive of global mid-resolution, highly
calibrated, multispectral data is a unique resource for applications at
various scales, such as land use/cover mapping (Fuller et al., 1994),
change detection (Byrne et al., 1980; Liu & Cai, 2011), ecosystem
dynamics monitoring (Fisher et al., 2006; Masek et al., 2008), as
well as biogeochemical parameter estimation (Cohen & Goward,
2004). Currently, the Thematic Mapper (TM) sensor on board Landsat
5 has substantially exceeded its planned design life (Bédard et al.,
2008) and has unfortunately been halted since November 2011
(USGS, 2012). The Landsat 7 Enhanced Thematic Mapper Plus (ETM
+) sensor was the successor of TM. However, on May 31st, 2003,
the scan-line corrector (SLC) of ETM+ failed permanently, which
caused roughly 22% of the pixels to be un-scanned in any ETM+
images (referred to as SLC-off images) (Arvidson et al., 2006). More
seriously, the width of these wedge-shaped data gaps increases the
further east or west from the nadir path, resulting in large missing
areas toward the edges of the scene, which leaves a major problem
for the applications of ETM+ images. Therefore, ﬁlling gaps in SLCoff ETM+ images is very crucial and necessary to ensure the
continuity of this longest satellite observation. In addition, even if
⁎ Corresponding author at: 1036 Derby Hall, 154 North Oval Mall, Columbus, OH
43210‐1361, USA. Tel.: + 1 614 247 2775; fax: +1 614 292 6213.
E-mail address: liu.738@osu.edu (D. Liu).
0034-4257/$ – see front matter © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.rse.2012.04.019

Landsat 5 could be recovered before the launch of LDCM (Williams
et al., 2006), the ﬁlled ETM+ images can be a valuable supplement
of Landsat 5 TM to increase the availability of data in the frequently
cloudy regions (Ju & Roy, 2008).
After the failure of SLC, many methods have been developed to ﬁll
the data gaps. These methods can be generally divided into two
categories: deterministic interpolation and geostatistical interpolation. The difference between these two categories is that deterministic interpolation methods predict un-scanned pixels based on some
empirically speciﬁed mathematical formulas, while geostatistical
interpolation methods incorporate some kind of randomness in
the prediction based on the statistical properties of the image. The
ﬁrst deterministic interpolation approach was proposed by a joint
United States Geological Survey/National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (USGS/NASA) Landsat team, referred to as local linear
histogram-matching method (USGS, 2004). The linear histogrammatching method uses a moving window to get the localized linear
transform function and then converts the pixel value of input auxiliary
scenes to ﬁll un-scanned gaps. This method requires that input scenes
have minimal clouds, snow cover, low temporal variability and minimum date separation (USGS, 2004), which is not practical in some
cloudy regions. As an alternative, MODIS images are used to predict
the SLC-off ETM+ images by a semi-physical fusion approach (Roy et
al., 2008). In addition, Maxwell (2004) introduced an object-based
segmentation model to ﬁll the gaps by using same-scene pixels outside
the gaps, and this approach was further evaluated for land cover classiﬁcation (Bédard et al., 2008). Then, this object-based segmentation
approach was further improved by using multi-scale segmentation

50

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

(Maxwell et al., 2007). Although the above methods are demonstrated
to be effective to ﬁll the missing pixels in SLC-off images in some case
studies, they cannot ensure the accuracy of predictions in heterogeneous landscapes, and they have failed to predict small or narrow objects (Maxwell, 2004; Maxwell et al., 2007; Roy et al., 2008; USGS,
2004). To improve the accuracy of gap ﬁlling in heterogeneous landscape areas, Chen et al. (2011) recently proposed a Neighborhood Similar Pixel Interpolator (NSPI) approach to interpolate the gaps. NSPI
makes use of the neighboring pixels with similar spectral characteristics
to predict the value of un-scanned pixels, and it integrates spatial and
temporal information of input images. Because of these two properties,
NSPI can get more accurate results for small and narrow landscape features than the previous deterministic approaches (Chen et al., 2011).
However, NSPI still has some limitations. As a deterministic approach,
NSPI cannot produce the uncertainty of predictions, and the impact of
changes between input and target images on the ﬁnal results is not
clear (Chen et al., 2011). In addition, the weight parameters in NSPI
are empirically determined by spatial and spectral distances, which
may affect their robustness in application for various situations.
For geostatistical methods, ordinary kriging and co-kriging
techniques were employed to ﬁll the data gaps (Pringle et al., 2009;
Zhang et al., 2007). These geostatistical methods can provide the
uncertainty of predictions, which is a signiﬁcant difference with the
deterministic methods. The fundamental idea of geostatistics is
Tobler's ﬁrst law of geography, i.e., near spatial data values are more
related to each other than distant data values (Tobler, 1970).
Assuming that pixel values in satellite images are geostatistical data
generated from an intrinsically stationary process (i.e., a spatial
random process satisfying two conditions: 1) a constant mean and
2) the variance of the differences at any two locations only depends
on the displacement between the two locations), ordinary kriging
uses the target SLC-off image itself to predict its un-scanned pixels
and co-kriging adds the secondary image into prediction (Pringle
et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2007). Case studies demonstrated that the
geostatistical approaches improved the accuracy of ﬁlled results to
some extent compared with the USGS's local linear histogrammatching method (Pringle et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2007). However,
there are still some visual striping patterns in the ﬁlled results caused
by smoothing effects. Speciﬁcally, linear features are affected seriously, such as where roads are ﬁlled as other landscapes, and where
rivers are ﬁlled as land surface (Pringle et al., 2009; Zhang et al.,

2007). In other words, these geostatistical methods cannot ﬁll the
SLC-off images well at the pixel-level, which limits the quantitative
applications of these ﬁlled images. The reason for this weakness of
geostatistical methods may be that the intrinsic stationarity assumption is not always valid especially for heterogeneous landscapes
(Pringle et al., 2009).
Considering that NSPI and geostatistical interpolation methods
have their respective merits, this study develops a new geostatistical
approach for ﬁlling gaps in SLC-off ETM+ images by integrating the
theory of geostatistics with the idea of the NSPI method. We refer to
this new approach as Geostatistical Neighborhood Similar Pixel
Interpolator (GNSPI). It is expected that GNSPI will interpolate the
gaps more accurately than other methods. The steps of GNSPI will
be described ﬁrst and then a simulation study will be implemented
to evaluate the performance of GNSPI.
2. Methodology
2.1. Data for algorithm test
In order to compare the proposed GNSPI with the NSPI method,
this study used the same data set in the NSPI paper (Chen et al.,
2011). The 15 km × 15 km (500 × 500 Landsat pixels) area is located
in eastern Maryland around 39.10°N and 76.14°W. Fig. 1(a) shows
the Landsat 5 TM image acquired on April 29, 2010, which was
further simulated as SLC-off image with un-scanned gaps
(Fig. 1(b)). These simulated gaps were generated using the gap
mask from an actual SLC-off ETM+ image so that they represent the
real situation in practice. The simulated gaps are composited by
250,000 un-scanned pixels. This simulated SLC-off image (Fig. 1(b))
is used as the target SLC-off image, which will be ﬁlled using the
auxiliary images. To keep the consistency with NSPI, only the results
of green, red and near infrared (NIR) bands (bands 2, 3 and 4) were
reported to evaluate the performance of the proposed method.
Fig. 2 shows all the auxiliary images in this study, including Landsat
5 TM and Landsat 7 ETM+ images. TM auxiliary images are acquired
on February 8, 2010 (Fig. 2(a)), May 15, 2010 (Fig. 2(b)), and
September 4, 2010 (Fig. 2(c)), respectively. ETM+ auxiliary images
are acquired on March 20, 2010 (Fig. 2(d)), April 5, 2010 (Fig. 2(e)),
and June 8, 2010 (Fig. 2(f)), respectively. From Figs. 1 and 2, we can
see that it is a very heterogeneous area with relatively small patches.

Fig. 1. NIR-red–green composites of Landsat TM images for the simulation study: (a) TM image acquired on April 29, 2010; (b) simulated SLC-off image based on (a). (For
interpretation of the references to color in this ﬁgure legend, the reader is referred to the web version of this article.)

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

51

Fig. 2. The auxiliary images used in the case study: (a)–(c) TM images acquired on February 8, May 15 and September 4, 2010, respectively; (d)–(f) ETM+ images acquired on
March 20, April 5, and June 8, 2010, respectively.

In particular, the farm land in the area experiences rapid reﬂectance
changes. This area is an ideal region for testing the gap ﬁlling
algorithms, since most existing methods have some difﬁculties in
accurately ﬁlling gaps for areas with a heterogeneous landscape and
rapid changes (Maxwell, 2004; Maxwell et al., 2007; Pringle et al.,
2009; Roy et al., 2008; USGS, 2004; Zhang et al., 2007).
2.2. Algorithm development

while the date of the target SLC-off image is denoted as t2. Here, the
TM image acquired on May 15 (Fig. 2(b)) is chosen as the input
image because it is temporally close to the target image acquired on
April 29 (Fig. 1(b)). The input image must be geometrically rectiﬁed
to match the target image. To eliminate the different illumination
conditions, both the target SLC-off image and input image are
calibrated to top-of-atmosphere reﬂectance with a range from 0 to
1. It is not necessary to do atmospheric correction and relative
radiometric normalization for these images because the effects of

Like NSPI, GNSPI also needs Landsat images acquired at other
dates as input images to ﬁll the target SLC-off image (Chen et al.,
2011). The input images should have values at the corresponding
locations of gaps in the target image. Besides Landsat 5 TM images,
Landsat 7 SLC-off ETM+ images can also be used as input images
because the gaps are not completely overlapped among scenes
acquired on different dates. Landsat 5 TM images will be primarily
considered as input images if they are available. However, the Landsat
7 ETM+ images are also very important input data for GNSPI if
Landsat 5 ceases to function. Considering that there are some
differences for the implementation of GNSPI when using these two
types of input data, the steps of GNSPI using TM input images will
be introduced ﬁrst and then the different steps for using ETM+
input images will be clariﬁed.
2.2.1. Using TM images as input data
Fig. 3 shows the ﬂowchart of GNSPI using TM images as input data.
The criterion of input image selection is that the image is the most
similar to the target image in seasonality, has smallest spectral
changes compared with the target image, and should be cloud-free.
Generally, the TM input image acquired closer in time to the target
image has a higher similarity to the target image. For the convenience
of this paper, the acquisition date of this input image is denoted as t1,

Fig. 3. The ﬂowchart of GNSPI using TM input images.

52

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

atmosphere on the images and the small difference of the spectral
properties between TM and ETM+ sensors (Teillet et al., 2001) will
be taken account into the GNSPI algorithm. However, it should be
noted that the difference in illumination conditions between images
may not be completely eliminated for mountainous areas even after
the radiometric calibration. In this case, the topographic correction
process (Riano et al., 2003) is recommended before implementing
gap ﬁlling.
As Fig. 3 shows, there are 6 main steps for the proposed GNSPI
method. These steps correspond to the strategy of kriging technique
in practice (Papritz & Stein, 1999). Speciﬁcally, the data need to be
detrended ﬁrst using physical or empirical models (steps 1 and 2);
second, the semivariogram of the residuals from the detrending
model is estimated (step 3); third, the residual of the location without
observation is predicted using ordinary kriging (steps 4 and 5); last,
the ﬁnal prediction of the location without observation is obtained
by adding back the trend (step 6). All steps of GNSPI will be discussed
in detail below.
2.2.1.1. Step 1: classifying the input image at t1. As in NSPI, it is reasonable to assume that pixels with high spectral similarity should have
similar temporal changing pattern (Chen et al., 2011). In order to
model the temporal changing trend for each group of spectrally
similar pixels in the next step, the input image at t1 is classiﬁed
based on the spectral similarity of pixels. Considering that there
would be no signiﬁcant land cover changes during the short time
interval between the input image and the target image, the classiﬁcation map of input image at t1 can also represent the situation at t2.
Here, to ensure the automation of GNSPI algorithm, we use an
unsupervised classiﬁer, ISODATA, to classify the input image at t1.
ISODATA can automatically merge and split classes according to the
spectral similarity between pixels to get the optimal classiﬁcation
results (Ball & Hall, 1965), and has been widely used for remotely
sensed image classiﬁcation (Call et al., 2003; Tarabalka et al.,
2009). Fig. 4 shows the classiﬁcation result of TM image of May
15, which includes 3 spectral classes. Based on visual interpretation,
the three spectral classes generally correspond to water, vegetation
and bare ground.

can be caused by different atmospheric situations and the intrinsic
difference of spectral properties between two sensors, but the most
signiﬁcant changes would be caused by land surface dynamics, such
as the phenological changes of vegetation and variations in soil
moisture. It should be noted that different classes might have different temporal changing patterns. For example, the spectral characteristics of vegetation change dramatically during the growing
season compared with that of bare ground. Therefore, the temporal
relationship between the input image at t1 and the target image at
t2 is modeled for each class, respectively by using the classiﬁcation
map from the last step. This temporal relationship can be used to
detrend the target image at t2. A linear function is used to model
the temporal relationship for each class (Zhu et al., 2010):
Rðs; t 2 ; bÞ ¼ ak  Rðs; t 1 ; bÞ þ bk ; if pixel s belongs to class k

ð1Þ

where R(s, t1, b) and R(s, t2, b) are reﬂectance values of pixels at
location s in band b for images at t1 and t2, respectively; ak and bk
are coefﬁcients of this linear model for class k. The coefﬁcients can
be estimated by linearly regressing the reﬂectance values of all the
same-class pixels from the image at t1 and the image at t2, and the
locations of these pixels should be outside the gaps of the target
image. The regressed parameters for the temporal relationship of
each band and each class is listed in Table 1. It is clear that different
classes have different temporal relationships, indicating the necessity
to model the temporal relationship for each class rather than for the
whole image.
Then, the temporal relationship for each class is applied to predict
the reﬂectance values of all the pixels in the target SLC-off image,
including the pixels outside or inside the gaps:
^ ðs; t ; bÞ ¼ a^  Rðs; t ; bÞ þ b^ ; if pixel s belongs to class k
R
2
k
1
k

ð2Þ

where a^ k and b^ k are coefﬁcients estimated by linear regression,
^ ðs; t ; bÞ is the prediction of reﬂectance for pixel s at t2. For the
R
2
pixel s outside the gaps, we can calculate its prediction residual,
ε(s, b), because it has observed values at t2:
^ ðs; t ; bÞ; if pixel s is outside the gaps:
εðs; bÞ ¼ Rðs; t 2 ; bÞ−R
2

ð3Þ

2.2.1.2. Step 2: modeling temporal relationship for each class. From t1 to
t2, the reﬂectance value would experience changes. These changes
2.2.1.3. Step 3: modeling semivariogram for each class. After the
residuals of all pixels outside the gaps are calculated by Eq. (3), we
can get a residual image as shown in Fig. 5. From Fig. 5, it is clear
that the residual is spatially continuous, especially for the pixels of
the same class. It is assumed that the residual of each class is an
intrinsically stationary spatial process, i.e., the differences of residuals
between two same-class pixels separated by a given distance have a
constant mean and a constant variance. Then a semivariogram can
be used to model the spatial dependence of residuals for each class
(Matheron, 1971). For each class, 1000 pixels outside the gaps in
the residual image are randomly selected as samples for estimating
the experimental semivariogram. Here, the lag distance is limited
from 0 to 40 pixels, because the pixels ﬁnally used to predict the
un-scanned pixel are located within this distance. For each spatial

Table 1
The regressed parameters for the temporal relationship of each band and each class⁎.
Band

Class 1

Class 2

Class 3

Fig. 4. Classiﬁcation map of TM image acquired on May 15, 2010.

Green
Red
NIR

Class 1

Class 2

Class 3

a

b

a

b

a

b

0.3185
0.3256
0.8419

0.0389
0.0289
− 0.0145

0.4486
0.5077
0.5497

0.0457
0.0369
0.0835

0.6679
0.7758
0.8866

0.0161
0.0040
− 0.0130

⁎ P-values for all the regression model are less than 0.0001.

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

53

ﬁtting the experimental semivariograms by a nonlinear weighted
least squares method (Cressie, 1985). For the example shown in
Fig. 6, the parameters a, σ 2, and r of the ﬁtted model are 1.84 × 10 - 6,
1.55 × 10 - 5, and 19.51, respectively. The ﬁtted curve is very close to
the experimental semivariograms, indicating the effectiveness of the
parametric model and ﬁtting method. Table 2 summarizes the
parameters of the ﬁtted semivariograms for each band and each
class. It shows that the residuals of different classes have different
spatial dependence characteristics, so it is reasonable and necessary
to model the semivariograms for each class, respectively.

Fig. 5. The residuals of prediction from the temporal relationship for NIR band.

lag h, i.e., the separation distance between two locations, the experimental semivariogram γ(h) can be calculated as:
1 X
2
½εðsi ; bÞ−ε ðsi þ h; bÞ ;
2NðhÞ i¼1
N ðhÞ

γ ðhÞ ¼

ð4Þ

where N(h) is the number of pairs of samples apart with each other at
the distance h. Fig. 6 plots the experimental semivariograms versus
spatial lags of green band for class 1. It shows a gradually increasing
trend, indicating that residuals of pixels spatially close together are
more alike than those farther apart, and the semivariograms would
be more stable when the lags reach a certain distance.
In order to use the characteristics of spatial dependence in geostatistical techniques, the experimental semivariograms need to be
ﬁtted by a mathematical model, subject to the constraint of positive
deﬁniteness. An exponential model is frequently used to ﬁt the experimental semivariograms (Goovaerts, 1997). The parametric function
of exponential model is:
(
γ ðhÞ ¼




2
−3h=r
; for h > 0
a þ σ −a 1−e
0;

for h ¼ 0

;

ð5Þ

where a, σ 2, and r are parameters which represent nugget effect, sill,
and range, respectively. These parameters can be estimated through

2.2.1.4. Step 4: selection of sample pixels. As in NSPI, GNSPI assumes
that spatially adjacent pixels with high spectral similarity (referred
to as similar pixels) have similar temporal changing patterns.
Eq. (1) describes the temporal change for each class in the whole
scene. However, the temporal change has some spatial variability
even for pixels from the same class. For example, farm land planted
with the same crop would show some different spectral changes
due to different fertilizing and irrigating strategies at different
locations. Therefore, when the global relationship Eq. (1) is used to
predict the reﬂectance value at t2, it will cause some local errors,
which is calculated by Eq. (3). Based on the assumption that
neighboring-similar pixels have similar temporal changing patterns,
the residuals of these similar pixels should also show the similarity.
For an un-scanned pixel (target pixel), its trend can be ﬁrst estimated
by the global temporal relationship in Eq. (1), but the residual of this
prediction is unknown. In contrast, the similar pixels of this target
pixel outside the gaps have residual values. Accordingly, it is
reasonable to use the residuals of these similar pixels to predict the
residual of the un-scanned target pixel. Therefore, selecting sample
pixels for prediction is a key point in this approach.
Fig. 7 shows the schematic diagram for selecting sample pixels.
The selection process can be implemented using a TM time-series.
The number of images included in this time-series depends on the
data availability. The strategy for selecting these images is that
they are temporally separated in one year so that they can capture
the temporal changing characteristics as much as possible. We
recommend one image per season if it is possible to compose this
time-series, which could accurately identify pixels with the same
temporally changing pattern. This time-series includes the input
image at t1. Except the input image at t1, all other auxiliary images
in this time-series are only used to select sample pixels and are not
involved in predicting the value of the target pixel. If there are no
other available cloud-free images except the input image, the
selection process of sample pixels can be implemented only using
the input image at t1. In this study, the time-series includes 3 TM
images acquired on February 8, 2010, May 15, 2010, and September
4, 2010 (Fig. 2(a)–(c)).
For convenience, an example by using time-series of two images is
used to explain the selecting procedure. These two images are
ordered as the 1st image and the 2nd image based on their temporal
closeness to the target SLC-off image. These two images include the

Table 2
The parameters of the ﬁtted semivariogram models for each band and each class.

Class 1

Class 2

Class 3
Fig. 6. The experimental semivariogram and the ﬁtted model for green band of class 1.

Band

Sill

Nugget

Range

Green
Red
NIR
Green
Red
NIR
Green
Red
NIR

1.55 × 10− 5
3.13 × 10− 5
9.94 × 10− 5
1.39 × 10− 4
4.07 × 10− 4
7.12 × 10− 4
3.00 × 10− 5
7.33 × 10− 5
7.09 × 10− 4

1.84 × 10− 6
0
5.06 × 10− 5
4.44 × 10− 5
8.90 × 10− 5
7.94 × 10− 5
1.51 × 10− 5
0
2.70 × 10− 4

19.51
52.76
14.16
31.70
37.49
24.25
17.42
43.28
17.83

54

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

a) Same-class pixels

b) Similar pixels of the 1st image c) Similar pixels of the 2nd image

d) Intersection of similar pixels e) Selected sample pixels
Target pixel
Gap in the target image
Same-class pixel
Similar pixel
Selected sample pixel

Fig. 7. Schematic diagram of the selection of sample pixels when using TM images.

one selected as t1 input image which has been classiﬁed in step 1.
First, from the classiﬁcation map (Fig. 4), all the pixels in a
moving window with the same class as the central target unscanned pixel are selected (the light gray pixels in Fig. 7(a)).
Second, because the same-class pixels would also show some
locally varying characteristics, it is necessary to reﬁne the sameclass pixels to ensure that the selected pixels are more similar to
the target pixel. From the 1st image, similar pixels are selected
from the same-class pixels according to spectral similarity. The
spectral similarity is deﬁned as root mean square difference
(RMSD) between each same-class pixel si and the target unscanned pixel st (Chen et al., 2011):

RMSDi ¼

vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
uP
u n
u ðRðsi ; 1st; bÞ−Rðst ; 1st; bÞÞ2
tb¼1
n

ð6Þ

where n is the number of bands. A large RMSD represents a large
spectral difference. Then, a threshold approach is used to identify
similar pixels (Chen et al., 2011). If RMSD of the si same-class
pixel satisﬁes Eq. (7), it will be selected as a similar pixel:
"
n
X

RMSDi ≤

#
σ ðb; 1stÞ  2=m =n

ð7Þ

b¼1

where σ(b,1st) is the standard deviation of the 1st image for band
b, and m is the number of classes in the classiﬁcation map (Fig. 4).
The similar pixels selected from the 1st image are shown in
Fig. 7(b). Using the same procedure, similar pixels of the 2nd image
are also selected as shown in Fig. 7(c). It is possible that the locations
of similar pixels selected from the two images might be different because the spectral similarity between pixels would change over time
due to the difference of temporal changing patterns. For example, a
pixel of vegetation before green-up would show similar spectral characteristics as a pixel of bare ground but will be very different from the bare

ground after it turns to green. If more images are included in the
time-series, similar pixels will be selected from these images, respectively using the same approach above. Third, the intersection
of the similar pixels from each image is selected (Fig. 7(d)), because the intersection from different dates can provide a more accurate selection of pixels with the same temporal changing
pattern as the target pixel. Fourth, there may be a large number
of pixels located in the intersection, but a large number of sample
pixels used to predict the target pixel will decrease the computing
efﬁciency. Therefore, we only select M sample pixels from the
intersection for prediction. Considering that spatially closer pixels
may be more similar than spatially distant ones (Zhu et al., 2010;
Chen et al., 2011), M pixels outside the gaps of target SLC-off
image, which are spatially closest to the target pixel, are selected
from the intersection area as shown in Fig. 7(e). This study sets M
as 20, which is recommended by NSPI (Chen et al., 2011) and by
geostatistical interpolation (Webster & Oliver, 2001). If the pixels
in the intersection were fewer than the sample size M, all the pixels
in the intersection will be used as sample pixels, regardless of the
total number of pixels in the intersection. The size of the moving
window depends on the homogeneity of the image. If the area is
homogeneous, it is easy to select enough sample pixels within a
smaller moving window. Otherwise, a larger moving window is
needed. In our case study, the size of the moving window is set
as 25 × 25 pixels, by which 99% of un-scanned pixels can have
enough sample pixels for prediction.
2.2.1.5. Step 5: predict the residual of the target pixel by ordinary kriging.
As explained above, the residual of the prediction by the temporal
relationship (Eq. 2) is unknown for the un-scanned target pixel,
while the sample pixels have known residual values. In addition, the
residuals show spatial dependence (Fig. 5). Therefore, it is reasonable
to use these sample pixels to predict the residual of the target pixel
by the geostatistical method. Under the assumption of intrinsic
stationarity for the residual image, ordinary kriging predictor is
used to estimate the residual value of the target pixel. The prediction

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

of the target pixel ε⁎(st, b) by ordinary kriging is a weighted average
of the residual values of M sample pixels:


ε ðst ; bÞ ¼

M
X

55

The relative half-interval is used to represent the uncertainty of
the ﬁnal prediction:


wi εðsi ; bÞ;

ð8Þ

U ðst ; bÞ ¼ 100%  Iðst ; bÞ=R ðst ; t 2 ; bÞ:

ð14Þ

i¼1

where wi is the ordinary kriging weight of the ith sample pixel. The
weights are determined based on the locations of sample pixels
using the theoretical semivariogram obtained from step 3 and two
statistical optimality criteria: unbiasedness and minimum meansquared prediction error. For unbiasedness, the kriging weights are
forced to sum to 1. For the second criterion, the Lagrange multiplier
method is used to solve this constrained optimization problem to
get the weights. In matrix notation, weights can be calculated as:
−1

w¼C

ð9Þ

c;

where,
wT ¼2 ½w1 ; ⋯; wM ; v;
3
C ðs1 ; s1 Þ ⋯ C ðs1 ; sM Þ 1
6
⋮
⋯
⋮
⋮7
7
C¼6
4 C ðsM ; s1 Þ ⋱ C ðsM ; sM Þ 1 5;
1
⋯
1
0
T
c ¼ ½C ðs1 ; st Þ; ⋯; C ðsM ; st Þ; 1;
where, v is the Lagrange multiplier, and C(si, sj) represents the
covariance between the pixel at location si and the pixel at location
sj. The covariance can be computed based on the ﬁtted exponential
semivariogram model:






2
C si ; sj ¼ σ −γ si −sj  ;

ð10Þ

where | si − sj | is the spatial distance between the pixel at location si
and the pixel at location sj. After the weights are calculated, the
residual of the target pixel can be predicted by Eq. (8), and the
variance of the ordinary kriging prediction is:
2

T −1

2

σ ok ðst ; bÞ ¼ σ −c C

ð11Þ

c:

2.2.1.6. Step 6: calculate the ﬁnal prediction and uncertainty. The
^ ðst ; t 2 ; bÞ can be predicted by
temporal trend of the target pixel R
Eq. (2) using the observation at t1. The reﬂectance value of the target
pixel R⁎(st, t2, b) can be ﬁnally predicted by adding the residual from
ordinary kringing estimator to the temporal trend:
^ ðs ; t ; bÞ þ ε ðs ; bÞ:
R ðst ; t 2 ; bÞ ¼ R
t 2
t




ð12Þ

From the variance of ordinary kriging, the half-interval of 95%
conﬁdence for the ﬁnal prediction is:
Iðst ; bÞ ¼ 1:96 

qﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
σ ok 2 ðst ; bÞ:

Multiple ETM+ images

No

ð13Þ

The ith input
ETM+ image

3. Testing experiment
3.1. Comparison of prediction accuracy

SLC-off image at t2

i+1

Fill all the
gap pixels?

2.2.2. Using ETM+ images as input data
Fig. 8 shows the ﬂowchart of GNSPI when ETM+ images are used
as input data. GNSPI requires that the pixel at the location of the unscanned target pixel has a value in the input image. Fortunately, the
gaps in the ETM+ images do not overlap completely among scenes.
Therefore, it is possible to use multiple ETM+ images to ﬁll the
gaps by GNSPI. First, we need to select multiple ETM+ images
which cover the same area of the target image. The number of input
images depends on the degree of gap overlap. In this study, three
ETM+ images acquired on March 20, 2010 (Fig. 2(d)), April 5, 2010
(Fig. 2(e)), and June 8, 2010 (Fig. 2(f)) are used as input data for
ﬁlling gaps of the simulated SLC-off image (Fig. 1(b)). Second, all
the input ETM+ images are sorted by acquisition date. From these
ETM+ images, the ETM+ image temporally closest to the target
image will be preferentially used as input data (Chen et al., 2011).
Third, if the un-scanned pixels in the target image are scanned in
the ﬁrst ETM+ input image, they will be ﬁrst ﬁlled according to the
method described in Section 2.2.1. Then, the second temporally
closest ETM+ image will be used to ﬁll the rest of the un-scanned
pixels until all the un-scanned pixels are ﬁlled. The only different
step of using ETM+ as input images is the selection of sample pixels.
Since the input ETM+ images also have gaps, to guarantee that
enough sample pixels outside the gaps can be selected, the size of
moving window is enlarged to 31 × 31 pixels in our case study.
Fig. 9 shows the process of selecting sample pixels when using ETM
+ images as input data. Here, we also use a time-series composed
of two ETM+ images as an example to explain the selection process.
First, the images are ordered by the temporal closeness to the target
image. The temporally closest image will be selected as the input
image at t1, which will be classiﬁed to get the classiﬁcation map.
From this map, the pixels outside the gaps with the same class as
the target pixel are selected (Fig. 9(a)). Second, similar pixels in the
1st and 2nd images are selected by the threshold method (Chen
et al., 2011) (Fig. 9(b) and (c)). Third, the intersection of similar
pixels selected from different images is identiﬁed. It should be
noted that both images in the time-series have gaps and the gaps
are partly overlapped. If we only select the intersection of similar
pixels outside the gaps in each image, the number of pixels in the
intersection would be very limited. Therefore, a speciﬁc approach is
applied to ﬁnd out this intersection area: besides the similar pixels
simultaneously selected from all the images, the similar pixel selected
from the 1st image, which is located within gaps of the 2nd image, is
also kept in the intersection because we cannot determine whether it
is or not a similar pixel in the 2nd image. Last, M spatially closest
similar pixels are selected as ﬁnal sample pixels for predicting the
value of the target pixel (Fig. 9(e)).

Fill gap-pixel
according to the
method using TM
images

Fig. 8. The ﬂowchart of GNSPI using ETM+ input images.

The simulated SLC-off image (Fig. 1(b)) was used to test the
proposed GNSPI method. The images in Fig. 2 were used as auxiliary
images to ﬁll the simulated gaps. The actual image of the simulated
SLC-off image (Fig. 1(a)) can help us to assess the prediction accuracy
quantitatively.
For the case of using TM images as input images, the one temporally closest to the simulated SLC-off image, i.e., the image acquired
on May 15 (Fig. 2(b)), will be selected as an input image at t1.
However, considering the difﬁculty of collecting temporally close

56

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

a) Same-class pixels

b) Similar pixels of the1st image c) Similar pixels of the 2nd image

d) Intersection of similar pixels

e) Selected sample pixels
Target pixel
Un-scanned pixel
Same-class pixel
Similar pixel
Selected sample pixel

Fig. 9. Schematic diagram of the selection of sample pixels when using ETM+ input images.

images in frequently cloudy regions (Ju & Roy, 2008), it is necessary
to investigate the performance of GNSPI when using a temporally
further input image. Therefore, the TM image acquired on February
8 (Fig. 2(a)), which has signiﬁcant spectral changes with the target
SLC-off image, was also selected as an input image for ﬁlling gaps in
the simulated SLC-off image. Accordingly, we can obtain two ﬁlled
images using Fig. 2(a) and (b) as input images, respectively.
For the case of using ETM+ images as input images, three ETM+
images in Fig. 2 were used to ﬁll the gaps in the simulated SLC-off
image. Considering the degree of gap overlap, these three ETM+
images were enough for ﬁlling all the un-scanned pixels in the
simulated SLC-off image.
To better evaluate the strength and limitations of GNSPI, we
compared GNSPI with other two methods: NSPI developed by Chen
et al. (2011) and previous geostatistical methods developed by
Zhang et al. (2007). For NSPI, input images are also needed, and either
TM or ETM+ images can be used as input images. Therefore, NSPI
used the same input images as GNSPI to ﬁll the simulated SLC-off
image and got three ﬁlled results: two by using temporally closer
and further TM input images, respectively and one by using multiple
ETM+ input images. For previous geostatistical methods, ordinary
kriging technique does not need any other input images to ﬁll the
data gaps while co-kriging technique incorporates the secondary
image to ﬁll the data gaps (Zhang, et al., 2007). However, ordinary
kriging technique was shown to be comparable with co-kriging
(Zhang et al., 2007). Therefore, we only selected ordinary kriging
technique as previous geostatistical methods for comparison,
which is referred to as PGM in the following. PGM does not require
other input images, so only one ﬁlled result by PGM for the
simulated SLC-off image can be obtained. In addition, as NSPI has
been demonstrated to have better performance than some of the
existing methods (Chen et al., 2011), such as USGS's local linear
histogram matching method, we did not include these existing
methods for comparison.
The accuracy of the above ﬁlled results will be quantitatively
assessed by comparing them with the actual image. Root mean square

error (RMSE) is a commonly used index for evaluating the accuracy
(Chen et al., 2011), which can be calculated as:
vﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
uN
uP 
u ½R ðsi ; t 2 ; bÞ−R0 ðsi ; t 2 ; bÞ2
t
;
RMSE ¼ i¼1
N

ð15Þ

where N is the total number of un-scanned pixels, R⁎(si, t2, b) and
R0(si, t2, b) are predicted and actual values of the ith un-scanned
pixel, respectively. A smaller RMSE indicates a more accurate prediction.
3.2. Comparison of ﬁlled image for classiﬁcation
The ﬁlled SLC-off image will be used for various applications. Land
cover classiﬁcation is one important application of Landsat images
(Fuller et al., 1994). To investigate the effectiveness of ﬁlled Landsat
SLC-off images in the application community, all the ﬁlled images in
this study were classiﬁed to get the land cover maps, and then
these land cover maps were compared with the one generated from
the actual image. In detail, we use a supervised classiﬁer, Support
Vector Machines (SVM), to classify these ﬁlled images and the actual
image, because SVM has been widely used for remotely sensed image
classiﬁcation and found to be competitive with the other best
classiﬁers (Huang et al., 2002). Training samples for each land cover
type were selected from the actual image by visual interpretation.
There are four land cover classes, i.e. water, natural vegetation,
crops and bare ground, and the size of training samples for each
class is 634, 775, 765, and 601 pixels, respectively. Then, all the
images were classiﬁed by SVM method using the same set of training
samples, which can eliminate the effects of different training samples
on the ﬁnal classiﬁcation result.
The error matrix method was applied to quantitatively assess the accuracy of classiﬁcation (Congalton, 1991). Because we focus on the
classiﬁcation of gap ﬁlling result, only the pixels within the gaps were
taken into account for building the error matrix. The classiﬁcation result
from the actual image was treated as reference data. We admit that

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

classiﬁcation of the actual image is not exactly the ground truth, but it
can be used to evaluate whether the ﬁlled images can get similar classiﬁcation results as the actual image when they use the same classiﬁer
and the same training samples, which can explain the effectiveness of
these ﬁlled images in the classiﬁcation application. Two commonly
used statistical indices, overall accuracy (oa) and kappa coefﬁcient
(kappa) calculated from the error matrix (Congalton, 1991), were
reported to evaluate the classiﬁcation accuracy. oa is one of the most
popular indices used to assess the classiﬁcation accuracy. It is computed
by summing the correct proportions in the error matrix. kappa is another popular index calculated as the proportion of agreement between

57

classiﬁcation result and reference data after chance agreement is removed (Congalton, 1991). Higher values of oa and kappa indicate better
classiﬁcation results.
4. Results
4.1. Filled results of the simulated SLC-off image
Fig. 10 shows all the ﬁlled results of the simulated SLC-off image
by different methods and different input images. For simpliﬁcation,
the result ﬁlled by NSPI using the input TM image of February 8 is

a) Actual image

b) PGM

c) NSPI-TM1

d) GNSPI-TM1

e) NSPI-TM2

f) GNSPI-TM2

g) NSPI-ETM+

h) GNSPI-ETM+

Fig. 10. Results of gap-ﬁll for the simulated SLC-off image. (a) the actual image; (b) the ﬁlled image by PGM; (c), (e) and (g) are the ﬁlled images by NSPI using TM image of
February 8, TM image of May 15 and ETM+ images as input images, respectively; (d), (f) and (h) are the ﬁlled images by GNSPI using TM image of February 8, TM image of
May 15 and ETM+ images as input images, respectively; the smaller images on the right side of each ﬁlled image are the zoomed-in regions marked by a black square.

58

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

referred to as NSPI-TM1, while the result using the TM input image of
May 15 is referred to as NSPI-TM2 and the result using ETM+ is NSPIETM+. Correspondingly, the result ﬁlled by GNSPI using the TM
image of February 8 as input image is referred to as GNSPI-TM1,
while the result using the TM image on May 15 as input image is
referred to as GNSPI-TM2 and the result using ETM+ is GNSPI-ETM+.
By visual comparison of all ﬁlled images shown in Fig. 10, it is clear
that the image ﬁlled by the previous geostatistical method (PGM)
shows the most obvious striping effects, indicating that there are large
prediction errors by PGM. For the comparison between NSPI and
GNSPI, the images ﬁlled by both methods are generally visually close
to the actual image. However, from the zoomed area of these ﬁlled images, we can see that GNSPI ﬁlls the gaps more accurately than NSPI
when both methods use a temporally further TM input image. To better
assess the similarity between the ﬁlled results and the actual image,
Fig. 11 shows the scatter plots of all the ﬁlled results and the actual
image for NIR band. From Fig. 11, we can see that data points of all results are almost equally distributed at the two sides of 1:1 line, indicating small biases of all results. However, the data points in the scatter
plot of the NSPI and GNSPI predictions fall closer to the 1:1 line than
the PGM prediction. The R2 value of the PGM prediction is 0.7100,
which is the lowest one among all the ﬁlled results. For comparison between NSPI and GNSPI, their scatter plots and R2 values are very close
except when using a temporally further TM image as the input image.
We can see that when using TM image of February 8 as input image,
GNSPI can get a higher R 2 value 0.9368 than NSPI's 0.8481, indicating
that the image ﬁlled by GNSPI is closer to the actual image than NSPI.
Table 3 reports the RMSE values for all the gap-ﬁlling results.
Generally, the accuracy of the PGM prediction is the lowest, because
the RMSE values of all the three bands are the highest compared
with NSPI and GNSPI. For both NSPI and GNSPI, the results ﬁlled by
temporally closer input images can get higher accuracy. By using
the same input image, GNSPI can get smaller RMSE values than
NSPI, especially when using a temporally further input TM image.
From Table 3, we can see that GNSPI can reduce the RMSE value of
NSPI from 0.0121 to 0.0072 for green band, from 0.0173 to 0.0108
for red band, and from 0.0398 to 0.0256 for NIR band when both

Table 3
RMSE of gap-ﬁlling results.
Band

PGM

NSPITM1

GNSPITM1

NSPITM2

GNSPITM2

NSPIETM +

GNSPIETM +

Green
Red
NIR

0.0151
0.0244
0.0550

0.0121
0.0173
0.0398

0.0072
0.0108
0.0256

0.0063
0.0095
0.0209

0.0057
0.0086
0.0190

0.0071
0.0113
0.0235

0.0064
0.0102
0.0224

methods use TM image of February 8 as input data. The relative
reduction of RMSE value is more than 35% for each band, indicating
that GNSPI can greatly improve the accuracy of gap ﬁlling when a
temporally distant input image is used.
As mentioned in the Methodology section, GNSPI can also provide
the uncertainty of the prediction by Eq. (13). Table 4 shows the mean
uncertainty of each ﬁlled results by PGM and GNSPI. Comparing the
mean uncertainty of PGM and GNSPI, we can see that GNSPI can
greatly reduce the prediction uncertainty. In addition, it is apparent
that the uncertainty of prediction by temporally further input images
would be larger than that by temporally closer input images.
Therefore, using the temporally closer TM images for ﬁlling the gaps
can reduce the prediction uncertainty. Although the multiple ETM+
input images are also temporally close to the target image, the
uncertainty of GNSPI-ETM+ is larger than that of GNSPI-TM2. The
reason is likely that the sample pixels selected from ETM+ input
image are generally spatially farther from the target pixel than the
similar pixels selected from the TM input image.
4.2. Classiﬁcation of ﬁlled results
Table 5 shows the accuracy assessment of the classiﬁcations of all
ﬁlled images using the classiﬁcation of the actual image as reference
data. Higher values of oa and kappa indicate a stronger agreement
between the classiﬁcations of the ﬁlled image and the actual image.
Classiﬁcation of PGM result has the lowest values of oa and kappa. The
oa value of PGM is only 0.6572, which means that more than 34%
of pixels are classiﬁed as different land cover types from the actual

Fig. 11. Scatter plots of the actual and the predicted values of all un-scanned pixels for NIR band. Panels (a)–(g) are the scatter plots of Fig. 10(b)–(h), respectively.

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60
Table 4
The mean uncertainty (%) of ﬁlled results by PGM and GNSPI.
Band

PGM

GNSPI-TM1

GNSPI-TM2

GNSPI-ETM +

Green
Red
NIR

34.25
61.36
78.63

15.81
28.74
29.52

11.30
15.78
21.13

13.54
28.92
19.10

image. Therefore, at least in this case study, the ﬁlled image by PGM
is not good enough for the application of land cover mapping. Generally, classiﬁcations of images ﬁlled by NSPI and GNSPI have similar
accuracy except when using temporally further input images. When
using closer input images, both the classiﬁcation of images ﬁlled by
NSPI and GNSPI can get an oa value around 0.9, which would be
good enough for the applications in practice. However, when using
temporally further input images, the accuracies of the classiﬁcation
of the images ﬁlled by NSPI and GNSPI are both lower than those
using a temporally closer input image. However, the reduction of accuracy for GNSPI is smaller than NSPI, indicating that GNSPI is more robust than NSPI in producing a ﬁlled image. Therefore, GNSPI would
satisfy further applications like land cover mapping even using temporally distant input images.
5. Discussion and conclusions
Landsat 7 ETM+ images have been widely used in studies at
regional and global scales, but the SLC failure greatly reduces their
utility. In addition, the failure is permanent after subsequent efforts
to recover the SLC were not successful, so the necessary and feasible
way to address this problem is to ﬁll the gaps in the SLC-off images.
Although there are many methods proposed to ﬁll the gaps, the
quality of the ﬁlled images in heterogeneous regions is still not
satisfactory for further applications, with the exception of images
ﬁlled using the recently developed NSPI method. However, NSPI
predicts the value of un-scanned pixels empirically and cannot
provide prediction uncertainty. This paper proposed a new method,
GNSPI, to ﬁll the gaps in SLC-off images, which is based on the
geostatistical theory and NSPI. Through the simulation study, GNSPI
was competitive compared with the previous geostatistical methods
and NSPI. For the purpose of simplicity and consistency with NSPI,
only results of bands 2, 3, and 4 were reported, but the other bands
show similar results as these three bands in our simulation study.
GNSPI can largely improve the accuracy of gap ﬁlling compared
with the previous geostatistical method. Although GNSPI is only
slightly better than NSPI when using temporally closer input images,
GNSPI greatly reduces RMSE values of ﬁlled results compared with
NSPI when using temporally further input images. The robustness of
GNSPI when using temporally further input images is very important
because it is difﬁcult to acquire a temporally closer input image in
cloudy regions (Ju & Roy, 2008). However, in some frequently cloudy
regions, it is also difﬁcult to acquire cloud-free input images even
though they are temporally distant from the target image. For this
case, clouds in the input image should be removed by cloud removal
methods (Melgani, 2006; Zhu et al., 2012) before it is used to ﬁll gaps.
Compared with the previous geostatistical methods, GNSPI has two
major strengths. First, GNSPI makes better use of the temporal
information from the input image. The information of the input image
is used to predict the values of all pixels outside the gaps by using the
Table 5
Standard accuracy assessment of land cover classiﬁcation from all ﬁlled results.
Index

PGM

NSPITM1

GNSPITM1

NSPITM2

GNSPITM2

NSPIETM +

GNSPIETM +

oa
kappa

0.6572
0.5302

0.8248
0.7595

0.8719
0.8235

0.8936
0.8537

0.9057
0.8703

0.8811
0.8366

0.8761
0.8300

59

temporal relationship of Eq. (1). It removes the temporal trend of the
target image and obtains the residual image. Ordinary kriging technique
requires the image to be an intrinsically stationary spatial process, that
is, with constant mean. The previous geostatistical methods apply an ordinary kriging technique directly on the original reﬂectance image
(Pringle et al., 2009; Zhang et al., 2007). However, for the original reﬂectance image, the intrinsic stationarity assumption is more difﬁcult to
satisfy because it is very common that some very low reﬂectance objects like water and also very bright objects like bare ground coexist in
the same image. On the contrary, for the residual image after removing
the temporal trend, it better satisﬁes the assumption of an intrinsically
stationary spatial process, so it is more reasonable to apply ordinary
kriging on the residual image than the original reﬂectance image. In
addition, GNSPI emphasizes the temporal information of the pixel in
the input image at the same location of the gap pixel, which can help
to keep the spatial details of the ﬁlled image. The previous geostatistical
methods can also apply co-kriging technique to use the information of
the secondary image. However, the previous geostatistical methods
select samples from the secondary image for the predicting process
rather than emphasizing the sample at the same location of the unscanned pixel. This may be the reason why there is no signiﬁcant
difference between ﬁlled results of ordinary kriging and co-kriging
(Zhang et al., 2007). Second, GNSPI considers the difference between
different classes. GNSPI models the spatial dependence for each class
rather than for the whole image, which can better satisfy the intrinsic
stationarity assumption. Pringle et al. (2009) admitted that it is not
plausible to assume that the whole image satisﬁes the intrinsic
stationarity assumption. In addition, GNSPI uses the sample pixels,
which have high spectral similarity with the target pixel, to predict
the value of the target pixel. Conversely, the previous geostatistical
methods selected the spatially closest samples rather than the
samples with the highest spectral similarity, which would cause the
striping effects on the ﬁlled image. For instance, a target pixel in a narrow river uses its surrounding pixels from bare ground as samples,
which will cause large prediction errors. In all, through better use of
temporal information and consideration of the difference between
classes, GNSPI can signiﬁcantly improve the accuracy of gap ﬁlling
compared with the previous geostatistical methods.
Compared with NSPI, GNSPI has three main advantages. First, while
both GNSPI and NSPI use weighted average interpolator to predict the
un-scanned pixel, the weights are generated in different ways. Weights
in GNSPI are calculated from geostatistical theory and depend on the
spatial dependence of the image. Weights in NSPI are empirically determined and do not depend on the image itself. Therefore, GNSPI should
be more robust in various landscapes than NSPI. Second, GNSPI selects
better sample pixels in the neighborhood of un-scanned target pixel
than NSPI. GNSPI uses a time-series as the auxiliary data to reﬁne the
similar pixels, and selects sample pixels with more similar spectral
characteristics and more similar temporal change pattern to the target
pixel. NSPI just uses the input image itself to select samples. In the
case of long temporal intervals between the input and target images,
the similar pixels selected by NSPI would be incorrect. Considering
that the probability of acquiring one cloud-free observation of a Landsat
pixel per season in most regions is high (Ju & Roy, 2008), it is reasonable
and feasible to get help from these cloud-free observations to reﬁne the
similar pixels. Last but not least, GNSPI applies a geostatistical approach
which can provide the uncertainty of prediction, while NSPI is still a
type of deterministic approach which cannot produce statistical uncertainty for each prediction (Chen et al., 2011). The prediction uncertainty
is important and helpful for further applications of the ﬁlled images. It
can help users to estimate the potential errors of using ﬁlled images
as input data sources in their studies. Although the improvement of
GNSPI from NSPI is not that signiﬁcant compared with the improvement of GNSPI from previous geostatistical methods, it has a number
of strengths and provides a new perspective to address the SLC-off
problem.

60

X. Zhu et al. / Remote Sensing of Environment 124 (2012) 49–60

It should be noted that GNSPI has some predetermined parameters. Basically, the sample size and the number of classes are two
parameters that are most sensitive in GNSPI. Therefore, we mainly
investigated the effects of sample size and the number of classes.
For sample size M, we tested GNSPI by using different sample sizes.
The results showed that the accuracy of gap ﬁlling is increasingly
improved with sample size but it stabilizes when sample size is larger
than 20, which is consistent with the results in NSPI (Chen et al.,
2011). Considering that larger sample size will cost more computing
time, we also recommend 20 as the appropriate sample size for ﬁlling
gaps using GNSPI in practice. For the classiﬁcation of input image, the
minimum and maximum numbers of classes need to be speciﬁed so
that ISODATA can automatically determine the optimal number of
classes by merging or splitting the classes. Obviously, the number of
land cover classes should not be too small or too large: a small number of classes cannot capture the difference in temporal relationships
for different land cover types; a large number of classes would make
the land cover map more fragmented, causing the sample pixels distant from the target pixel. Therefore, the sensitivity of GNSPI to the
number of classes was tested. The result showed that the accuracy
of ﬁlled images is comparable if they use the number of classes
close to the optimal one from ISODATA classiﬁer, indicating the relative robustness of GNSPI to the number of classes.
One disadvantage of GNSPI is its relatively slow computing speed. In
the case study, GNSPI needed almost twice the time of NSPI to ﬁll all the
un-scanned pixels. However, considering the advantages of GNSPI, i.e.,
the most accurate gap-ﬁlling algorithm and providing uncertainty
measures, the relatively slow computing speed is acceptable and worthwhile. There would be three options to improve the computing efﬁciency. First, fewer sample pixels will reduce the computing time. However,
a small sample size will reduce the prediction accuracy. Zhang et al.
(2007) only used 8 pixels spatially nearest to the target pixel for prediction, which was considered not enough by Pringle et al. (2009). Webster
and Oliver (2001) recommend at least 20 samples for kriging interpolation, which is followed in our case study. Therefore, it is necessary to
ﬁnd a balance between prediction accuracy and computing time when
deciding an appropriate sample size. Second, a hybrid method is
worth considering in the future, which has been explored by Pringle
et al. (2009) and demonstrated to be a feasible way to increase the computing efﬁciency. This hybrid method could combine GNSPI with several high-speed methods, and could automatically select one of these
methods according to the speciﬁc situations. For example, for homogeneous regions, the local linear histogram matching method (USGS,
2004) can be applied to predict the un-scanned pixels; NSPI can be
chosen if the input image is temporally close to the target image. Last,
the computing speed can be speeded up using high-performance computers or parallel computing.
Acknowledgments
This study was supported in part by the International S&T
Cooperation Program (2010DFB10030) and by the National Science
Foundation of USA (1010314), and by the State Key Laboratory of
Earth Surface Processes and Resource Ecology. We thank Jungkuan
Liu, Shiguo Jiang, Shanshan Cai and Christine Biermann for helpful
comments on the manuscript.
References
Arvidson, T., Goward, S., Gasch, J., & Williams, D. (2006). Landsat-7 long-term acquisition plan: Development and validation. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote
Sensing, 72, 1137–1146.
Ball, G. H., & Hall, D. J. (1965). ISODATA, a novel method of data analysis and classiﬁcation.
Tech. Rep. Stanford, CA: Stanford University.
Bédard, F., Reichert, G., Dobbins, R., & Trépanier, I. (2008). Evaluation of segment-based
gap-ﬁlled Landsat ETM+ SLC-off satellite data for land cover classiﬁcation in southern
Saskatchewan, Canada. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 29, 2041–2054.

Byrne, G. F., Crapper, P. F., & Mayo, K. K. (1980). Monitoring land-cover change by
principal component analysis of multi-temporal Landsat data. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 10, 175–184.
Call, K. A., Hardy, J. T., & Wallin, D. O. (2003). Coral reef habitat discrimination using
multivariate spectral analysis and satellite remote sensing. International Journal
of Remote Sensing, 24, 2627–2639.
Chen, J., Zhu, X., Vogelmann, J. E., Gao, F., & Jin, S. M. (2011). A simple and effective
method for ﬁlling gaps in Landsat ETM plus SLC-off images. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 115, 1053–1064.
Cohen, W. B., & Goward, S. N. (2004). Landsat's role in ecological applications of remote
sensing. Bioscience, 54, 535–545.
Congalton, R. G. (1991). A review of assessing the accuracy of classiﬁcations of
remotely sensed data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 37, 35–46.
Cressie, N. (1985). Fitting variogram models by weighted least squares. Journal of the
International Association for Mathematical Geology, 17, 563–586.
Fisher, J. I., Mustard, J. F., & Vadeboncoeur, M. A. (2006). Green leaf phenology at
Landsat resolution: Scaling from the ﬁeld to the satellite. Remote Sensing of
Environment, 100, 265–279.
Fuller, R. M., Groom, G. B., & Jones, A. R. (1994). The land-cover map of Great-Britain —
An automated classiﬁcation of Landsat Thematic Mapper data. Photogrammetric
Engineering and Remote Sensing, 60, 553–562.
Goovaerts, P. (1997). Geostatistics for natural resources evaluation. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Goward, S. N., Arvidson, T. J., Faundeen, J., Williams, D. L., Irons, J., & Franks, S. (2006).
Historical record of Landsat global coverage: Mission operations, NSLRSDA, and international cooperator stations. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing,
72(10), 1155–1169.
Huang, C., Davis, L. C., & Townshend, J. R. G. (2002). An assessment of support vector machines for land cover classiﬁcation. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 23, 725–749.
Ju, J. C., & Roy, D. P. (2008). The availability of cloud-free Landsat ETM plus data over
the conterminous United States and globally. Remote Sensing of Environment, 112,
1196–1211.
Liu, D., & Cai, S. (2011). A spatial-temporal modeling approach to reconstructing
land-cover change trajectories from multi-temporal satellite imagery. Annals of the
Association of American Geographers, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00045608.2011.596357
Masek, J. G., Huang, C. Q., Wolfe, R., Cohen, W., Hall, F., Kutler, J., et al. (2008). North
American forest disturbance mapped from a decadal Landsat record. Remote
Sensing of Environment, 112, 2914–2926.
Matheron, G. (1971). The theory of regionalized variables and its applications [(Les Cahiers
du center de Morphologie Mathematique de Fontainebleau 5)]. Fontainebleu: CMMF.
Maxwell, S. K. (2004). Filling landsat ETM+ SLC-off gaps using a segmentation model
approach. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 70, 1109–1111.
Maxwell, S. K., Schmidt, G. L., & Storey, J. C. (2007). A multi-scale segmentation
approach to ﬁlling gaps in Landsat ETM+ SLC-off images. International Journal of
Remote Sensing, 28, 5339–5356.
Melgani, F. (2006). Contextual reconstruction of cloud-contaminated multitemporal
multispectral images. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 44,
442–455.
Papritz, A., & Stein, A. (1999). Spatial prediction by linear kriging. In A. Stein, F. D. van
der Meer, & B. G. H. Gort (Eds.), Spatial statistics for remote sensing (pp. 83–113).
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic.
Pringle, M. J., Schmidt, M., & Muir, J. S. (2009). Geostatistical interpolation of SLC-off
Landsat ETM plus images. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing,
64, 654–664.
Riano, D., Chuvieco, E., Salas, J., & Aguado, I. (2003). Assessment of different
topographic corrections in Landsat-TM data for mapping vegetation types. IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 41, 1056–1061.
Roy, D. P., Ju, J., Lewis, P., Schaaf, C., Gao, F., Hansen, M., et al. (2008). Multi-temporal
MODIS-Landsat data fusion for relative radiometric normalization, gap ﬁlling,
and prediction of Landsat data. Remote Sensing of Environment, 112, 3112–3130.
Tarabalka, Y., Benediktsson, J. A., & Chanussot, J. (2009). Spectral-spatial classiﬁcation
of hyperspectral imagery based on partitional clustering techniques. IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 47, 2973–2987.
Teillet, P. M., Barker, J. l., Markham, B. L., Irish, R. R., Fedosejevs, G., & Storey, J. C. (2001).
Radiometric cross-calibration of the Landsat-7 ETM+ and Landsat-5 TM sensors
based on tandem data sets. Remote Sensing of Environment, 78, 39–54.
Tobler, W. R. (1970). A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region.
Economic Geography, 46, 234–240.
USGS (2004). Phase 2 gap-ﬁll algorithm: SLC-off gap-ﬁlled products gap-ﬁll algorithm methodology. Available online at landsat.usgs.gov/documents/L7SLCGapFilledMethod.pdf
(accessed on November 2, 2011).
USGS (2012). Landsat 5 suspension of operations extended. Available online at http://
www.usgs.gov/newsroom/article.asp?ID=3109 (accessed on March 25, 2012).
Webster, R., & Oliver, M. A. (2001). Geostatistics for environmental scientists. Chichester:
John Wiley & Sons.
Williams, D. L., Goward, S., & Arvidson, T. (2006). Landsat: Yesterday, today, and
tomorrow. Photogrammetric Engineering and Remote Sensing, 72, 1171–1178.
Zhang, C., Li, W., & Travis, D. (2007). Gaps-ﬁll of SLC-off Landsat ETM plus satellite image
using a geostatistical approach. International Journal of Remote Sensing, 28, 5103–5122.
Zhu, X., Chen, J., Gao, F., & Masek, J. G. (2010). An enhanced spatial and temporal
adaptive reﬂectance fusion model for complex heterogeneous regions. Remote
Sensing of Environment, 114, 2610–2613.
Zhu, X., Gao, F., Liu, D., & Chen, J. (2012). A modiﬁed neighborhood similar pixel
interpolator approach for removing thick clouds in Landsat images. IEEE Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Letters, 9(3), 521–525.

